# Constitution: An Overview **CHAPTER**

# *Learning Objectives*

# *After reading this chapter, you will be able to:*

- Understand the constitution, its types and its importance
- Know the composition and functioning of constituent assembly of India
- Explain the evolution of Indian constitution from the period of British rule to Indian independence
- Discuss whether the Indian constitution needs to be further reviewed or not

# INTRODUCTION TO CONSTITUTION

It is a system of beliefs and laws by which a country/state is governed. 'It is a document having special legal sanctity which sets out the framework and the principal functions of the organs of the government of the state and declares the principles governing the operations of those organs'.<sup>[1]</sup>

Constitution is defined as the collection of legal rules providing a framework for the government.

It reflects the dominant beliefs and interests or few compromises between the conflicting beliefs and interests, which are the characteristics of the society. It is a document of people's faith and aspirations.

Constitution derives its power and authority directly from the people. Constitution is the fundamental and supreme law of the land enjoying legal sanctity. Hence, it is above all the laws enacted by the Parliament.

Constitution is a document that reflects or symbolizes the independence of sovereignty of the country. The constitution is a special document that sets out the role and functions of the principal organs of the government namely the legislature, judiciary and executive and the relationships between them.

# Evolved and Enacted Constitutions

The constitutions of the world are broadly categorized into two major groups namely evolved and enacted constitutions.

A constitution, while primarily for the distribution of governmental powers, is, in its last analysis, a formal expression of adherence to that which in the modern times called the higher law and which in ancient times called natural law. *– James. M. Beck*

#### *Evolved Constitutions*

They come into existence over a period of time. They do not have a specific date of origin. Generally, they are unwritten and based on conventions and customs. Such constitutions are highly flexible and changes with the changing values and social beliefs from time to time. The legislature creates the constitution and so legislature is supreme. These constitutions are unitary in nature. For example, English Constitution.

| Evolved Constitutions    | <b>Enacted Constitutions</b>       |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------|
| • No date of origin      | • Deliberately created and enacted |
| • Highly flexible        | • Written and rigid                |
| • Legislature is supreme | • Constitution is supreme          |
| • Unitary in nature      | • Federal in nature                |

#### *Enacted Constitutions*

They have specific date of origin. They are deliberately created and enacted with purpose and are written constitution. They also have conventions but not to that extent of evolved constitution. Usually, they are rigid constitutions and federal in nature. Examples of enacted constitutions include, Constitutions of the United States of America and India. Here, the constitution is supreme as it creates the governmental organs.

#### IMPORTANCE OF CONSTITUTION

Constitution intends to offset the inefficiencies of the legal systems that form the basis of the formation of any modern state by creating a system that upholds the sovereignty of the state and the freedom of the people.

The constitution of a country establishes the organs of the government—the legislature, executive and judiciary. It defines the powers of the legislature, executive and judiciary, and makes a clear demarcation of the responsibilities assigned to each of them and regulates the relationship between these organs. Thus, the constitution provides for an efficient government.

Lord Acton stated that, 'Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely'. Hence, it is required to restrict the abuse of power and protect people against the ill-effects of such abuse. Therefore, the constitution also imposes certain limitations on power.

Thus, the constitution lays down the basic structure of the government and principles according to which the nation must be governed. It also lays down the goals for the nation which forms the basis of the duties prescribed to the governments as well as the people. It defines the relationship between the government and its people.

# Constitution of India

The major achievement of independent India was the framing of a new constitution based on justice, liberty, equality and fraternity.<sup>[2]</sup> The Indian constitution is a complex document not only providing for the democratic functioning of the government, but also contains provisions that are social in nature. The 'perplexing diversity of language, race, religion and culture' demanded a complete understanding of Indian society to make a constitution. The constitution, therefore, is a product of research and deliberations of a body of eminent representatives of the people and not a product of political revolution.[3]

<sup>2</sup> Constitutional Government in India: M. V. Pylee

<sup>3</sup> Ivor Jennings: Some characteristics of Indian constitution

The constitution prescribes certain values to the society, addresses certain social problems and promotes the modernization of the society. For instance, constitution prescribes socialism as a value to reorganize Indian society on a socialistic pattern. Through fundamental rights and Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP), the constitution addresses the social problems such as untouchability, gender inequality, etc.

It was essential for the Indian constitution to deal with the social aspects due to certain imminent reasons. According to M. V. Pylee, at the time of independence and making of the constitution, India provided a paradox, certain areas were comparatively advanced and prosperous while others were unbelievably backward, certain classes fabulously rich, others living in abject poverty. Socially, the evils generated by the caste system, the curse of untouchability and the canker of communalism based upon religious differences were destroying the very vitals of once-dynamic Indian society.[4] In spite of these there was a cultural unity prevailing in India. But that was threatened by the divisive forces and the painful experiences of partition also needed to be taken care of. These conditions presented a baffling political entity before the constituent assembly. Hence, the constitution was a made as an embodiment of the ideals and aspirations of the people of India and a product of the pattern of social forces that prevailed in India at the time of independence.

The Constitution of India is 'the machinery by which the laws are made'<sup>(5)</sup> and is the supreme law of the land. In India, the superiority of the constitution over a law made by Parliament is founded on the following principles:

- That the constitution was made by the people, the ultimate sovereign power lies with the people. The constituent assembly was a representative body elected by the people and the legislatures are also elected by the people. Hence, it is the people who have set-up the constitution and the government. The legislature being only a representative body under the constitution cannot claim the direct authority of the people. Therefore, the constitution is superior to the laws made by the legislature.
- That the source of authority of all organs of the state including the legislature is the constitution. It follows that the legislature cannot exercise any power which is not conferred upon it by the constitution.

In the Minerva Mills case<sup>[6]</sup>, it was decided that the 'people of the country, the organs of the government, legislature, executive and judiciary are all bound by the constitution, which is the paramount law of the land and nobody is above or beyond the constitution.'

#### Do You Know?

- • Prem Behari Narain Raizada manually wrote the original constitution in a flowing italic calligraphy.
- Artists from Shanti Niketan beautified and decorated each page.

# CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY OF INDIA

As early as in 1922, Mahatma Gandhi demanded the right of people of India to determine their political destiny by themselves. By this he demanded a constitution of India which will be the 'self-expression' of the people ratified by a law.

With the failure of the Simon Commission and the Round Table Conferences, the Indian leaders demanded for a constitution framed by the people of India without outside interference. However, the British did not accept the demand.

...

<sup>4</sup> Constitutional Government in India: M. V. Pylee

<sup>5</sup> The Constitution of India: P. M. Bakshi

<sup>6</sup> Minerva Mills vs Union of India (1980)

Manabendra Nath Roy, one of the prominent communist leaders, later in the year 1934, proposed the idea of a constituent assembly for India.

#### Do You Know?

- • Constitutional Convention of Philadelphia (1787–1789): Making of American Constitution.
- • Constitutional Convention of Quebec (1864): Making of Canadian Constitution.
- National Constituent Assembly was formed from the National Assembly on 9 July 1789 during the French Revolution: Making of French Constitution.

The outbreak of the World War II and the urgency caused by the war forced the British to accept the proposal in order to solve the Indian problem. The British deputed Sir Stafford Cripps with a draft declaration to be adopted after the war. The proposals were:

- That the Constitution of India was to be framed by an elected constituent assembly.
- That the constitution would give India dominion status, equal partnership in the British Commonwealth of Nations.
- That there should be one Indian Union comprising the provinces and Indian states.
- • Any Indian state or province which did not want to accept the constitution would be permitted to retain its existing constitutional position.
- With such non-acceding provinces, the British government could enter into separate constitutional arrangements.[7]

The Cripps Mission failed because both Indian National Congress and the Muslim League did not accept the proposal. Indian National Congress rejected the very idea of dominion status and refused to settle down anything less than complete independence. The Muslim League did not accept as there was no mention about the partition and creation of Pakistan.

Subsequently, the Quit India Movement was launched. Lord Wavell, the Governor-General attempted to strike a consensus between Indian National Congress and the Muslim League. However, every such attempt including the Simla conference failed. This led to the British government to send the cabinet delegation.

The Cabinet Mission recommended the following:

- There should be a Union of India comprised of the British Indian provinces and the states.
- The paramountcy of the Crown would lapse.
- With the exception of certain reserved subjects, all the subjects were to be retained by the state. Thus, it provided for a federal set-up with strong states and a weak federal government.
- For the purpose of framing a new constitution a constituent assembly was to be elected.
- An interim government was to be set up having the support of major political parties.

Constituent assembly of India was formed according to the scheme recommended by the Cabinet Mission. The total membership of the assembly thus, was to be 389, with:

- **1.** Through the provincial legislative assemblies 292 members were indirectly elected.
- 2. Indian princely states were represented by 93 members.
- **3.** Four members represented the Chief Commissioners' provinces.

However, as a result of the partition under the Mountbatten Plan of 3 June 1947, a separate constituent assembly was set up for Pakistan and representatives of some provinces ceased to be members of the assembly. As a result, the membership of the assembly was reduced to 299. The elected members were chosen by indirect election by the members of the provincial legislative assemblies.

<sup>7</sup> Introduction to Constitution of India: D. D. Basu

Dr. Sachidananda Sinha, the senior most member, was elected as the temporary and first President and later Dr. Rajendra Prasad was elected as its permanent chairman. The constituent assembly had its first meeting on the 9 December 1946. The objectives resolution was introduced by Jawaharlal Nehru on 13 December 1946. This resolution forms the Preamble to the constitution.

#### Do You Know

- • Dr. Sachchidananda Sinha was the first Indian who was appointed as a Finance Member of a Province.
- • Dr. Sinha is the oldest among members of the constituent assembly of India.

### Functioning of Constituent Assembly

The constituent assembly functioned as a political body in three phases:

- **1.** Between 9 December 1946 and 14 August 1947, during which it was not a sovereign body, but only a constituent assembly created under the British authority.
- **2.** Between 15 August 1947 and 25 January 1950, during which it was a sovereign body and acted as the constituent assembly in-charge of making the Indian constitution and also acted as a provisional Parliament.
- 3. Between 26 January 1950 and March 1952, during which it was only a provisional Parliament. It was handling the transaction phase till the elections to the first Lok Sabha.

The constituent assembly appointed various committees entrusted with drafting different aspects of the constitution such as the drafting committee, union constitutional committee, and committee on fundamental rights, etc. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar was the chairman of the drafting committee.

| <b>Important Committees of the Constituent Assembly</b>                                           |                            |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|
| Committee on the Rules of Procedure                                                               | Rajendra Prasad            |
| <b>Steering Committee</b>                                                                         | Rajendra Prasad            |
| House Committee                                                                                   | B. Pattabhi<br>Sitaramayya |
| Committee on the Functions of the Constituent Assembly                                            | G. V. Mavalankar           |
| <b>States Committee</b>                                                                           | Jawaharlal Nehru           |
| Advisory Committee on Fundamental Rights, Minorities<br>and Tribal and Excluded Areas             | Vallabhbhai Patel          |
| Minorities Sub-Committee                                                                          | H. C. Mookherjee           |
| <b>Fundamental Rights Sub-Committee</b>                                                           | J. B. Kripalani            |
| North-East Frontier Tribal Areas and Assam Excluded and Partially<br>Excluded Areas Sub-Committee | Gopinath Bordoloi          |
| Union Powers Committee                                                                            | Jawaharlal Nehru           |
| Union Constitution Committee                                                                      | Jawaharlal Nehru           |
| Drafting Committee                                                                                | B. R. Ambedkar             |

The constituent assembly functioned on the basis of three principles namely:

- 1. Consensus approach
- 2. Principle of accommodation
- 2. Art of selection and modification

Since the constituent assembly had to accommodate interest of various groups in a polycultural society as that of India, it had to function on the basis of consensus. The constituent assembly followed the principle of accommodation by which even the incompatible concepts were accommodated and incorporated into the constitution. For example, federalism with unitary features and democracy and socialism.

'Ashoka wheel in the national flag also denotes motion. There is death in stagnation. There is life in movement. India should no more resist change, it must move and go forward. The wheel represents the dynamism of a peaceful change.' – *Dr. Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan*

The constituent assembly formulated the Indian constitution by borrowing from ideas and principles of various constitutions of the world in order to get the benefit of the experiences of those constitutions. However, the constituent assembly borrowed the provisions only upon thorough consideration and deliberation. The founding fathers selected the provisions that were suitable an essential for governing a polycultural society like India and modified them suitably so that they would be suiting Indian conditions. Thus, they followed the art of selection and modification.

The constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949. Certain provisions relating to citizenship, election, provisional Parliament, temporary and transitional provisions came into force with immediate effect on that date. Rest of the provisions came into force on 26 January 1950.

The original constitution had 8 schedules, 22 parts and 395 articles. At present the constitution has 12 schedules, 26 parts and about 460 articles.

The assembly adopted the design of the National Flag on 22 July 1947 and National Anthem, which was originally composed in Bengali. It was adopted by the assembly in Hindi version on 24 January 1950. National Anthem was first sung in the Calcutta session of Indian National Congress on 27 December 1911. The state emblem is an adaptation from the Sarnath Lion Capital of Ashoka. The state emblem was adopted by the Government of India on 26 January 1950.

# MAKING OF THE CONSTITUTION–A HISTORICAL NOTE

The constitutional development of Indian can be traced to two distinct phases under the East India Company rule (1765–1858) and the rule of the British Crown (1858–1947). Under the East India Company rule there were two sets of legislations enacted namely:

- **1. Regulating Acts:** Aimed at regulating the operation of the East India Company in India and its administration of the Indian territory.
- 2. **Charter Acts:** Are the legislations that conferred the trading rights to the East India Company and the regulations relating to them.

| ______________________________________                                                      | $111000110110110110100101011101110111111$                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |  |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|
| The Regulating Act, 1773                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |  |
|                                                                                             | <b>Circumstances Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |  |
| $\bullet$ Grant of<br>Diwani rights<br>to East India<br>Company by<br>the Indian<br>rulers. | 1) Governor of Bengal made Governor-<br>General of the Company in India.<br>2) Governors of Madras and Bombay<br>subordinated to him in matters related to<br>war or emergency.<br>3) Four member council to assist Governor-<br>General.<br>4) Supreme Court, independent of the<br>Governor-General and the council created<br>at Calcutta. | a) First attempt of British<br>government to regulate<br>administration of Company in<br>India.<br>b) Gave no power to Governor-<br>General against his council,<br>constant friction between him<br>and his Council<br>c) Jurisdiction of Supreme Court,<br>not clarified. |  |

#### TABLE 11.1 The Constitutional Development of India (1773–1857)

88 O

| Pitt's India Act, 1784                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |  |  |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|--|
| <b>Circumstances</b>                                                                | <b>Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |  |  |
| • Failure of the<br>Regulating Act,<br>1773 and its<br>amendment of<br>1781.        | 1) Supreme Court, jurisdiction defined.<br>2) Six member Board of control constituted<br>to control and supervise the affairs of the<br>Company.<br>3) Chancellor of exchequer and the Secretary<br>of State ex officio members.<br>4) Council of the Governor-General in India<br>reduced from four to three.<br>5) Governors of Bombay and Madras<br>completely subordinated to Governor-<br>General.                                        | a) Complete centralization<br>of powers in the hands of<br>Governor-General.<br>b) Casting vote to Governor-<br>General in case of a tie.<br>c) Provided for unitary and stable<br>administration.<br>d) Reduced the powers of<br>directors and proprietors.<br>e) Increased rights of British<br>government in administration<br>of India.                                                            |  |  |
| <b>Charter Act, 1813</b>                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |  |  |
| <b>Circumstances</b>                                                                | <b>Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |  |  |
| • Loss of<br>markets in<br>America and<br>Europe.                                   | 1) Specified that sovereignty of British empire<br>in India was in the hands of British Crown.<br>2) Monopoly of East India Company to trade<br>with India was abolished.<br>3) Monopoly of East India Company to trade<br>with China in opium and tea remained.<br>4) Christian missionaries allowed to come<br>to India with the permission of the British<br>government.<br>5) The Company was required to spend on<br>education of Indians | a) Right of British Crown over the<br>possessions and administration<br>of India asserted.<br>b) Principle of state responsibility<br>for educating subjects<br>accepted.<br>c) Abolition of monopoly of the<br>Company to trade with India to<br>enable all British traders to get<br>access to raw materials. Britain<br>began to produce machine-<br>made goods, economic<br>exploitation of India. |  |  |
|                                                                                     | <b>Charter Act, 1833</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |  |  |
| <b>Circumstances</b>                                                                | <b>Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |  |  |
| • Loss of<br>markets in<br>America and<br>industrial<br>developments<br>in England. | 1) Company's monopoly of trade with China<br>abolished.<br>2) Provinces deprived of right to frame laws.<br>3) Only Governor-General-in-Council<br>authorized to frame laws for Indian affairs.<br>4) Fourth member, law member added to<br>Governor-General's council.                                                                                                                                                                        | a) Made central government<br>strong.<br>b) Macaulay became the first law<br>member.<br>c) Opening of the services to all<br>persons on merit remained<br>only an ideal.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |  |  |

- 5) North Western Province including Agra and western Awadh created.
- 6) Employment based on merit promised.
- only an ideal.
| <b>Charter Act, 1853</b>                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Circumstances   Main Features                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| • Company lost<br>its monopoly<br>but enjoyed<br>administrative<br>powers. | 1) British Parliament can give administration<br>of India to the Crown at its choice.<br>2) Directors of the Company reduced from<br>24 to 18.<br>3) Members of Governor-General's councils<br>and the Governor's council to be<br>appointed with the consent of the Crown.<br>4) Competitive examination system for<br>recruiting civil servants introduced. | Two important aspects of the act:<br>a) Crown could assume to itself<br>governance of India at any<br>time.<br>b) Although ineffective a mini-<br>legislative council was<br>established at the centre. |

Under the rule of the British Crown there were two sets of legislations enacted namely:

- 1. India Councils Act: The legislations that dealt with the powers and functions of the executive and legislative councils in India.
- 2. Government of India Act: These were the legislations enacted for establishing 'Responsible Governments' for India as a consequence of the national freedom movement.

| <b>Government of India Act, 1858</b>                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <b>Circumstances</b>                                                                                                      | <b>Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| $\bullet$ 1857 Revolt<br>failure of<br>Company rule.<br>• British Attitude<br>change<br>towards Indian<br>Administration. | 1) Administration handed over to British<br>Crown.<br>2) Court of Directors and Board of Control<br>abolished all their rights handed over to<br>Secretary of State for India.<br>3) 15-member council of India to assist<br>Secretary of State created.<br>4) Secretary of State for India with India<br>Council called Home Government.<br>5) At least half members of the Council<br>must have been from among those<br>persons who had served in India for at<br>least ten years<br>6) Services and economic affairs Secretary<br>of State bound by India Council. Rest<br>other matters enjoyed discretion.<br>7) Governor-General called the Viceroy as<br>well and bound to obey instructions of<br>Secretary of State. | a) It claimed to provide good<br>government for India.<br>But, brought no change in<br>government of India.<br>b) It concerned only with Home<br>Government.<br>c) Directors had been reduced<br>to nullity even before<br>Government of India Act,<br>1858. Hence, 'the transference<br>of authority to the Crown is<br>more nominal than real.' (Lord<br>Derby, the then British Prime<br>Minister). |

| <b>Indian Councils Act, 1861</b>                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Circumstances                                                                                                                                                                 | <b>Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| • Act of $1858$<br>failed to<br>reform Indian<br>administration.<br>• The provinces<br>were dissatisfied<br>with the<br>legislative power<br>assigned to them<br>by 1853 Act. | 1) Strength of Governor-General's<br>executive council increased. (minimum<br>six and maximum twelve).<br>2) Additional members to be nominated<br>by Governor-General.<br>3) At least half of them to be non-officials<br>to be nominated by Governor-General<br>for two years.<br>4) Finance member added to executive<br>council as fifth member.<br>5) Council could initiate bills except<br>concerning certain matters like<br>defence, religion, etc.<br>6) Such bills could be initiated only with<br>prior permission of Governor-General.<br>7) Governor-General empowered to issue<br>ordinances in cases of emergency.<br>8) Provinces can frame laws concerning<br>provincial affairs.<br>9) Provincial executive councils enlarged.<br>10) Power to nominate members with<br>Governor. | a) A beginning of legislatures<br>in India both at centre and<br>provinces.<br>b) Portfolio and cabinet system<br>introduced.<br>c) Failed to serve the purpose for<br>which it was created knowing<br>the wishes of Indians.<br>d) Mostly princes or big<br>landlords, who did not<br>represent Indian public<br>opinion, were nominated as<br>members.<br>e) Councils were to stamp<br>the wishes of the executive<br>councils no power either<br>concerning legislation or<br>controlling the executives.<br>f) It is called as 'the British policy<br>of association' or 'the policy of<br>benevolent despotism' |
| <b>Indian Councils Act, 1892</b>                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

| Indian Councils Act, 1892                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <b>Circumstances</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | <b>Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| • 1861 Act failed<br>to satisfy even<br>the liberal<br>opinion in India.<br>• Indian<br>government<br>wanted to<br>extend its power<br>to counter<br>the despotic<br>behaviour<br>of Home<br>Government in<br>the pretext of<br>reform. | 1) Number of additional members in central<br>legislature increased (minimum 10 and<br>maximum 20<br>2) At least ten were to be non-officials.<br>3) Number of additional members in<br>provincial legislatures increased<br>(minimum 8 and maximum 20).<br>4) Power to nominate with Governor-<br>General and Governors respectively.<br>5) Associations like 'Calcutta Chamber<br>of Commerce' could recommend non-<br>officials to be nominated to council, 'in<br>a way this was a provision for indirect<br>election'.<br>6) Legislative councils were allowed to<br>discuss the annual budgets but has no<br>voting power.<br>7) Members not permitted to ask<br>supplementary questions. | a) A step ahead from 1861 Act<br>laid foundation of responsible<br>government.<br>b) Expanded legislative councils<br>with more Indian members,<br>provision of indirect election<br>and power of members to<br>raise questions in council<br>mark gradual establishment of<br>parliamentary government.<br>c) The Indian members could<br>discuss but did not enjoy<br>right to vote any resolution<br>introduced by the government. |

8) President of the council could refuse permission for asking any question.

| <b>Indian Councils Act, 1909 or the Morley-Minto Reforms</b>                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <b>Circumstances</b>                                                                                                                                                                              | <b>Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| $\bullet$ To check the rise of<br>extremism in Indian<br>politics.<br>• To win over the<br>moderates in the<br>Congress to the side<br>of the government.<br>• To buttress Muslim<br>communalism. | 1) Strength of central legislative council<br>increased from 16 to 60.<br>2) Strength of provincial legislative<br>council increased, 50 in Bengal,<br>Madras and Bombay and 30 for<br>the rest.<br>3) Members of legislative councils, both<br>at centre and in provinces, were to be<br>of four categories:<br>$(i)$ <i>Ex officio</i> members<br>(ii) Nominated official members<br>(iii) Nominated non-official members<br>(iv) Elected members<br>4) Separate or communal electorate<br>system was introduced.<br>5) Members of legislative council were<br>permitted:<br>· To discuss budgets, suggest<br>amendments and to vote on them<br>except on non-voteable items.<br>· To initiate legislation concerning<br>public welfare.<br>• To ask questions and<br>supplementary questions from the<br>members of the executive council.<br>6) Governor-General and Governors<br>empowered to refuse the advice of<br>the concerned legislative council.<br>7) Governor-General empowered to<br>nominate one Indian member to his<br>executive council. | a) The act marked zenith<br>of 'Policy of Association'<br>or 'Policy of Benevolent<br>Despotism' pursued by English<br>in India.<br>b) Introduction of principle of<br>election.<br>c) Electorates received no<br>political educational<br>qualifications of the voters and<br>the members of the councils<br>were very high.<br>d) Communal and class interests<br>in legislative councils hindered<br>unity in work.<br>e) Governor-General and<br>Governors possessed the right<br>to veto the advice of councils.<br>f) Communal electorate<br>system inflamed Muslim<br>communalism. |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Government of India Act, 1919 or the Montague Chelmsford Reforms                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

| <b>Circumstances</b>                                                                                                    | <b>Main Features</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | <b>Comments</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| • First World War<br>ends.<br>• Mismanagement<br>in Indian<br>administration.<br>• Home Rule League.<br>• Lucknow Pact. | <b>Home Government</b><br>1) Number of members of Council of<br>Secretary of State (India Council) was<br>fixed to be minimum eight and<br>maximum twelve<br>2) A High Commissioner for India was<br>appointed<br>3) Power of Secretary of State reduced.<br><b>Administration of India</b><br>1) Governor-General given freedom to<br>nominate any number of members to<br>his executive council. | a) It marked the end of the policy<br>of 'benevolent despotism'<br>and the beginning of the<br>responsible government.<br>b) Elections to the legislatures<br>created political consciousness<br>among the people. Indians<br>came in direct contact with<br>the administration for the first<br>time.<br>c) Number of the Indians<br>increased in the civil services. |

- 2) Central legislature to have two houses:
  - (i) Council of States: Upper House with 60 members ( 33 elected and 27 nominated)
  - (ii) Legislative assembly: Lower House with 144 members (103 elected and 41 nominated).
  - Both Houses enjoyed equal powers in matters of legislation, in case of a tie, the Governor-General was to call g) Departments headed by Indian a joint meeting where the matter was decided by majority vote.
  - Each of them elected its own President.
- 3) Executive Council was not responsible to Legislature and Governor-General had right to refuse its advice.

#### **Provincial Administration**

- 1) Provincial legislatures consisted only of one house namely legislative council.
- 2) Governors given 'Instrument of Instructions' to guide them in administration.
- 3) Separate electorates expanded to Sikhs, Anglo-Indians, Indian Christians and Europeans.
- 4) Establishment of dyarchy in provinces —Central list and provincial list. Residuary powers given to centre.
- 5) Provincial list was classified into reserved subjects (administered by Governor with executive councillors) and transferred subjects (administered by Governor with the help of his Indian ministers chosen by him from legislative council).

### Government of India Act, 1935

Circumstances Main Features Comments • Agitation of Indians for self-government. • Simon Commission report and Round Table Conferences. 1) A federal government with native states included. 2) Dyarchy established at the centre. 3) Complete autonomy to the provinces. 4) The administrative subjects were divided into following three heads for this purpose: (i) The federal list subjects assigned to the central government. a) Ministries did useful works in their respective provinces in several fields like prohibition, education, cottage industries, rural development, etc. Indian leaders gained useful experience of administration and the working of the parliamentary government

- d) Indian women got the right of franchise for the first time.
- e) The dyarchy divided the provincial administration into two independent parts which was impossible to work on it.
- f) Division of subjects remained as a confusion about the rights and duties of different departments
- ministers were always short of finances, no control over the members of the Civil Services, depend on the governor for many things.
- h) The ministers did not work on the basis of joint responsibility.

- (ii) The provincial list subjects assigned to the provinces.
- (iii) The concurrent list subjects assigned both to the centre and the provinces.
- 5) A federal court was established at the centre.
- 6) The Reserve Bank of India was established.
- 7) Two new provinces, Sindh and Orissa were created.
- 8) The Governor-General and the Governors were given certain special responsibilities, i.e., the security of the Indian empire, safety of the honour of the British Crown and the native rulers, defence, etc., to act according to their own views.
- 9) Qualifications for the voters and the members were reduced both at the centre and the provinces.

### **Home Government**

- 1) Indian council was abolished, a few advisers were nominated to help the Secretary of State for India.
- 2) High Commissioner for India appointed by the Governor-General for a period of five years.

### **Federal Government**

- 1) Governor-General remained the head of the central administration.
- 2) No financial bill could be placed in the central legislature without his consent.
- 3) Federal legislature consisted of two houses. The Upper House, the Council of the State was to consist of 260 members (156 elected from British provinces and 104 from native states). It was a permanent body, one third of its members retired every year. The Lower House, the federal assembly, was to consist of 375 members (250 elected by the members of the legislatures of the British provinces and 125 nominated by the rulers of their respective states).

- b) Yet provincial autonomy was only in name. Indians were not given independent powers even in a limited field.
- c) Provision of the nomination was undemocratic.

- 1) Governor remained the head of the administration of a province assisted by a Council of Ministers.
- 2) Central government and Home Government were not expected to interfere in provincial affairs particularly when the Governor and his ministers agreed with each other, 'Provincial autonomy'.
- 3) Rights of provincial legislature however, were limited by the Governor's power to make ordinances and his special responsibilities.

# NEED FOR REVIEWING THE CONSTITUTION[8]

*Important questions from Previous years' on this topics are mentioned below:*

- **1.** Examine the need for the review of the Indian constitution. (CSE Mains Question: 2000)
- 2. Do you think there is a need for a review of the Indian Constitution? Justify your view.

*(CSE Mains Question: 2008)* 

'A constitution which is unchanging and static, it does not matter how good it is, but as a Constitution it is past its use.'<sup>(9)</sup> There have been demands for reviewing the Constitution of India in the recent times. The school that places the demand for review states that:

- The constituent assembly itself was not a purely democratic body. It was indirectly elected and there was nominated members too. Even the elected members were chosen 'by an electorate that constituted less than one third of the adult population of India'.
- There is a need to change the political, administrative and other structures and methods that that we inherited from the colonial master.
- The constituent assembly worked in a highly uncertain social and political conditions and it was influenced by the events in the wake of partition. As a consequence, there were several restrictions imposed on the rights guaranteed to the people which makes the constitution no different for the laws of British rule. This is largely because the constitution makers feared that the rights would weaken the administrative machinery of the union.
- The unclarity of the position of the princely states after independence and the resultant uncertainty caused fears about the unity and stability of the country.
- The members of the constituent assembly strongly believed that economic and political development of Indian society can happen only through the intervention of the state. This is British opinion about Indians are not capable of governing themselves.
- Another colonial view that predominated the constituent assembly was that 'India is not one nation; it is a conglomerate of numerous minorities.' $(10)$  Thus, the constitution provides extraordinary protection to minorities. Whereas, the state is empowered to 'reform' the majority religion, the constitution is silent on the reforms of the minority religion. This creates a lop-sidedness of the constitution.

<sup>8</sup> CSE Mains Question: 2008 (Do you think there is a need for a review of the Indian Constitution? Justify your view).

<sup>9</sup> Jawaharlal Nehru: Speech on Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951.

<sup>10</sup> http://cpsindia.org/index.php/art/120-articles-by-jk-bajaj-and-md-srinivas/towards-a-review-of-the-indian-constitution .

On the other hand, today the circumstances have changed since independence.

- There is another view that the constitution has granted rights to the people without balancing them with their duties. Perhaps present political environment in which the individual aspirations taking over aspirations of the people was not foreseen by the founding fathers of the constitution.
- Another argument supporting the need for reviewing the constitution is that the noble principles incorporated in the constitution have not been made practical tools capable of dispensing justice, ensuring accountability of the government machinery and protect the basic liberties of the common man.
- A constitution does not operate in a vacuum. It functions in a social set-up. So, it has to consider the specific nature of the society and its requirements. Otherwise, the constitution would become redundant and would fail, howsoever sound its design be. Over the years several changes have taken place in our socio-political structures. No more there is a single party domination in the Houses of Parliament. Regional parties have a strong say in the union government.
- The present-day political environment has now become ridden with disagreements that a national consensus on any issue has been evading.
- Not all sections of the society are represented in the political system. Adequate representation of women in legislatures is still evading. Except for the *Panchayats* and the municipalities, reservation of seats for women has not become a reality.
- The impact of caste and religion in the elections and the determination of voting behaviour have become a menace. Introducing proportional representation system to curb this is still evading.

Jawaharlal Nehru in his speech on first amendment bill mentioned, 'After all, the constitution is meant to facilitate the working of the government and the administrative and other structures of this country. It is meant to be not something that is static and which has a static form in a changing world, but something which has something dynamic in it, which takes cognizance of the dynamic nature of modern conditions, modern society.'

# Arguments against Review

However, there are equally plausible arguments against the need for reviewing the constitution of India.

- The need for reviewing the constitution was demanded to provide for a stable government and avoid frequent elections in the context of the coalition regime. It was even suggested for shifting to presidential form of government. However, President Dr. K. R. Narayanan asserted that 'political instability' was not a sufficient reason to discard the parliamentary form of government in favour of the presidential system.
- • Reviewing the constitution would be politically motivated attempt of 'selectively tampering with the constitution'.
- The move to review the constitution could take away the rights guaranteed by the constitution to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (SCs and STs), the Other Backwards Classes (OBCs) and minority groups in the country.
- The Constitution of India has been amended for about a hundred times. Certain amendments like the 42 and 44 amendments have been very comprehensive that it amounts to reviewing the constitution itself. In fact, the Constitution 42 Amendment is known as 'mini constitution'.
- Furthermore, the constitution has been subjected interpretation by the Supreme Court which has resulted in the establishment of several conventions and doctrines. The 'basic feature' doctrine propounded by the Court in the Kesavananda Bharti case and the landmark judgements in the S. R. Bommai's case and Cooper's case, etc., have ensured the better working of the constitution.

To quote Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the President of the constituent assembly and the first President of India, 'If the people who are elected are capable men of character and integrity, they should be able to make the best of a defective constitution. If they are lacking in these, the constitution cannot help the country.'