| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Economy of São Tomé and Príncipe" – news **·** newspapers
**·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( November 2012)__(Learn how and when
to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy of São Tomé and Príncipe** , while traditionally dependent on
cocoa, is experiencing considerable changes due to investment in the
development of its oil industry in the oil-rich waters of the Gulf of Guinea.

## History

Under Portuguese colonial rule, sugar plantations were set up, and the islands
were used for the transshipment of slaves.

## Oil reserves

Geologists estimate that the Gulf of Guinea zone (Niger Delta province) holds
more than 10 billion barrels (1.6 km3) of oil, although no reserves have yet
been proven. A joint oil project with Nigeria in 2005 is likely to
contribute[_when?_] $50 million of revenues to the government from the
exploration licence signing fees. This represents four times government
revenues in 2004. São Tomé is optimistic that significant petroleum
discoveries under the exploration licence are forthcoming, though no crude oil
nor natural gas has been found as of 2021.

## Agriculture

Since the 1800s, the economy of São Tomé and Príncipe has been based on
plantation agriculture. At the time of independence, Portuguese-owned
plantations occupied 90% of the cultivated area. After independence, control
of these plantations passed to various state-owned agricultural enterprises.
The dominant crop on São Tomé is cocoa, representing about 95% of exports.
Other export crops include copra, palm kernels, and coffee.

  *   *   *   * 

## Economic issues

The government has an economic program that is supported by the IMF, via its
Extended Credit Facility arrangement.

## Data

| The current version of this section was **imported from the CIA World
Factbook** and may require rewriting or reformatting to meet Wikipedia's
quality standards. Please discuss this issue on the talk page. Editing help is
available.  
---|---  
  
**Gross domestic product:** purchasing power parity – $316.9 million (2010
est.), $214 million (2003 est.)

**GDP – real growth rate:** 6% (2010 est.), 5% (2004 est.)

**GDP – per capita:** purchasing power parity – $1,800 (2010 est.), $1,200
(2003 est.)

**Unemployment rate:** 12.2% in the formal business sector (2017 est.)

**Budget:**

  * _revenues:_ $58 million
  * _expenditures:_ $114 million, including capital expenditures of $54 million (1993 est.)

**Industries:** light construction, textiles, soap, beer; fish processing;
timber

**Agriculture – products:** cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, copra, cinnamon,
pepper, coffee, bananas, papayas, beans; poultry; fish

**Exports:** $13 million (2010 est.)

**Exports – commodities:** cocoa 80%, copra, coffee, palm oil (2009)

**Exports – partners:** United Kingdom 32.99%, Netherlands 26.93%, Belgium
21.04%, Portugal 4.31% (2009)

**Imports:** $127.7 million (2017 est.)

**Petroleum** – it needs to import all of its required petroleum