---  
Part of a series on  
Montenegro  
History  
Geography  
  
  * Cities
  * Mountains
  * Places

  * Regions
  * Rivers

  
Politics  
  
  * Elections
  * Foreign relations

  * Government
  * Military

  * Municipalities
  * Parliament

  * Political parties

President  
(Milo Đukanović) Prime Minister  
(Zdravko Krivokapić)  
Economy  
  
  * Telecommunications

  * Transportation

  
Society  
  
  * Culture

Demographics  
(history)  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The **economy of Montenegro** is a transition economy seeking to stabilize,
diversify, and expand economic output. Montenegro navigates the impacts of the
Yugoslav Wars, the decline of industry following the dissolution of
Yugoslavia, and related economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations.
Montenegro joined the World Trade Organization in 2012. Montenegro joined the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization on 5 June 2017.

## History

As a relatively small principality founded in 1852, Montenegro's economy was
originally wholly based in agriculture, but it began developing an industrial
economy at the turn of the 20th century. Growth was hampered by its small
population, lack of raw materials, an underdeveloped transport network, and a
comparatively low rate of domestic and international investment.

The first industrial enterprises built in Montenegro were wood mills, an oil
refinery, a brewery, salt works, and electric power plants. Economic
development was interrupted by several wars, including the First Balkan War
(1912–13), World War I (1914–18), and World War II (1939–45). Throughout the
first half of the 20th century, agriculture continued to dominate Montenegro's
economic activity.

### The Yugoslav era

Montenegro's economy was developed significantly after World War II, as the
country was integrated into the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
experienced a period of rapid urbanization and industrialization. Its
industrial sector included the generation of electricity, steel and aluminum
production, coal mining, forestry and wood processing, textiles, and tobacco
manufacturing, while international trade, shipping, and tourism became
increasingly important by the late 1980s.

### Post-Yugoslavia

Following the dissolution of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, Montenegro's
entire industrial production system effectively collapsed, leading to
shortages of many goods and skyrocketing prices for them. Due to its political
alliance with Serbia and favourable geographic location, with access to the
Adriatic Sea and a shipping-link to Albania across Lake Skadar, Montenegro
became a hub for smuggling activity during the 1990s. The smuggling of petrol
and cigarettes, in particular, became a de facto legalised practice within the
country.

### Dissolution of State Union with Serbia

In 1997, Milo Đukanović took control of Montenegro's ruling party, the
Democratic Party of Socialists of Montenegro, and began severing political
ties with Serbia. He blamed the policies of Serbian President Slobodan
Milošević for the overall decline of the Montenegrin economy. Resurgent
inflation led the Montenegrin government to "dollarize" the economy, adopting
the German mark as its dominant currency. These economic policies also led to
a revision in 2003 of the relationship between the two countries from a
federal republic to a much looser political union of Serbia and Montenegro, in
which the Montenegrin government assumed responsibility for its own economic
policies.

The union did not last and on 21 May 2006, the people of Montenegro voted by
referendum to declare independence from Serbia.

## Current economy

Following the independence referendum, Montenegro's economy has evolved to
highlight its service sector, with a goal of becoming an elite tourist
destination, and is navigating the process of joining the European Union.
Attempts to attract foreign investors for large infrastructure projects are
ongoing, as these projects are integral to its development as a tourist
destination.

Montenegro experienced a real estate boom in 2006 and 2007, with wealthy
Russians, Britons and others buying property on the Montenegrin coast. As of
2008, Montenegro received more foreign investment per capita than any other
nation in Europe.

In the first half of 2012, Montenegro exported goods, mostly metals, worth
€182.3 million, which was 14.6% less than in the same period of the preceding
year. Its major export partners include Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Hungary. Montenegro's imports in the first half of 2012,
mostly food, oil, and electrical energy, were worth €864.9 million, which was
2.6% more than the same period in 2011. Its major import partners include
Serbia, Greece, and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in
Montenegro is Services with 15,496 companies followed by Retail Trade and
Wholesale Trade with 11,200 and 6,839 companies respectively.

### Finance

The Central Bank of Montenegro was founded in 2001 and shortly thereafter
adopted the euro as the currency of the country in March 2002.

The banking sector of Montenegro has a significant share of foreign capital.
Banks in Montenegro provide both retail and corporate banking products under
one roof, and most offer non-resident accounts, usually to both natural
persons and legal entities.

The Montenegro Stock Exchange, founded in 1993, was strengthened in 2011 when
it merged to become the sole stock exchange in the country. It is owned by a
number of financial institutions.

### Infrastructure

In the 2007 Great Recession the economic growth slowed, as several
infrastructure projects, such as the development of Velika Plaža, Ada Bojana,
Buljarica, Jaz Beach, and the construction of the Bar-Boljare motorway and new
power plants had to be postponed.

The Port of Bar is the country's primary communication with the maritime
trade. Its terminal is specialized in bulk shipment of bauxite and other ores,
grain, wood products, acetic acid and petroleum derivatives. In 2019 its
allowable draft was reported as 12.8m and several private storage tanks exist
on site, to service trade. Ro–Ro traffic from Bari and Ancona is handled
through an operational quay which is 400m long with water depth of between 4m
and 5.9m.

### Industry

The 2007 recession was difficult for the Podgorica Aluminium Plant, which was
initially built in 1969 and was the biggest single contributor to the
Montenegrin gross domestic product. The plant, first sold to Oleg Deripaska's
En+ Group in 2005, declared bankruptcy in 2013 and was sold to local magnate
Veselin Pejovic's Uniprom in 2014.

### Tourism

With 300km of coastline, backed by mountains, Montenegro is proving to be a
desirable holiday destination and generated around 25% of Montenegro's GDP.
Covid restrictions in 2020 saw Montenegro suffer a 15% drop in GDP and high
unemployment in the tourist sector before rebounding in 2021. Montenegro
prefers luxurious and upscale projects to attract tourists, encouraging
foreign investment to create the facilities.

### Energy

Elektroprivreda Crne Gore (EPCG) is the mainly state-owned coal and power
producer and distributor which owns two large hydroelectric plants and a coal
powered thermal power plant.

Two wind power farms are in operation, Krnovo Wind Farm and Možura Wind Farm
which generate a total of 118MW.

In June 2023 APCG obtained €82m finance to build the Gvozd wind farm which
will generate 54.6 MW. A new wind farm, the Bijela wind farm is planned with
118MW capacity following UAE based Alcazar Energy acquiring the rights in 2023
to spend $200m building the farm.

In 2023 Montenegro exported around €200m worth of electricity (2022 €140m)
becoming the top export item for the country.

### Agriculture

In July 2006 prior to EU integration efforts a survey document was produced by
the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management for the EU-funded
project _Agriculture and Rural Development Strategy of Montenegro_. The
Statistical Office of Montenegro learned as late as November 2021 how to
collect its data in formats acceptable to the European Commission.

Since 2010 agricultural trade relations between the EU and Montenegro have
been governed by the EU-Montenegro Stabilisation and Association Agreement,
and with the exception of beef, sugar and wine all agricultural products
originating in Montenegro can enter the EU duty free. The EU has a large agri-
food trade surplus with Montenegro, and exports meat, dairy and food
preparations. The EU mainly imports vegetables such as mushrooms, wine and
oils from Montenegro.

It was reported by the EC Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural
Development in March 2019 that the share of agriculture in Montenegro's GDP
was 8%. Agricultural land accounts for 38% of the total. Olives and citrus
fruits are grown in the coastal region, while seasonal vegetables and tobacco
are produced in the central areas. In the north of the country ungulates
dominate the farming. The largest share of the land consists of pasture and
grassland.

Montenegro became a member of the UN International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD) in 2015, which notes that the rural population represents
one-third of the total. In 2019 the IFAD focused its activities "on the key
challenges of better connectivity and higher productivity by (i) fostering the
graduation of micro and small agricultural holdings from the current non-
viable subsistence-type agriculture toward semi-commercial and commercial
agriculture, through investments in pro-poor rural infrastructure, (ii)
promoting the aggregation of smallholders within inclusive value chain
clusters and (iii) supporting the proactive role of municipalities to deploy
investment to promote inclusion for entire sectors of the rural population."

Over the years 2009 to 2019 the World Bank contributed a development project
called the _Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening
Project_ , by which (amongst other highlights) the food safety system was
upgraded in EU compliant manners, a Border Inspection Post with veterinary and
phyto-sanitary controls was established in the Port of Bar, an electronic farm
register was created, procedures for the classification of farm and food
establishments were completed according to EU norms, and the Veterinary
Diagnostic Laboratory in Podgorica was accredited in ISO 17025 analysis
methods.

### Import and export statistics

Imports per year (Source: World Bank)  | Year  | Imports (Billions in US dollars)   
---|---  
2018 | 3.68   
2019 | 3.60   
2020 | 2.91   
2021 | 3.65   
2022 | 4.63   
Exports per year (Source: World Bank)  | Year  | Exports (Billions in US dollars)   
---|---  
2018 | 2.36   
2019 | 2.43   
2020 | 1.24   
2021 | 2.51   
2022 | 3.21   
  
## Trade agreements

Montenegro has free trade agreements with many countries, but not Russia or
Belarus.

  * Central European Free Trade Agreement signed in 2007 giving free trade between Albania, North Macedonia, Moldova, UNMIK/Kosovo, Croatia, Serbia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
  * Turkey free trade agreement became effective in 2010
  * Ukraine 2011
  * European Free Trade Association, signed in 2011 giving free trade with EU countries together with Switzerland, Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein
  * USA _Most-Favored Nation status_ from 2003

## Minimum wage

After years with a minimum wage of €288.10 per month, there was a small
increase in 2019 to €331.30 before 2022 saw a jump to €532.50, €6,390 p.a.

## Taxation

VAT standard rate is 21% in 2022, with some items at 7% and is in line with EU
guidelines.

From 2023, a tax rate of 9% is applied to personal gross income above €700 per
month, and a tax rate of 15% for income above €1,000 per month. Montenegrin
municipalities also apply an income tax surcharge equivalent to 13-15% of the
national tax rate. Social security costs are 15.5%, 6% being borne by the
employee.