The **economy of Bhutan** is based on agriculture and forestry, which provide
the main livelihood for more than 60% of the population. Agriculture consists
largely of subsistence farming and animal husbandry. Rugged mountains dominate
the terrain and make the building of roads and other infrastructure difficult.
Bhutan is among the richest by gross domestic product (nominal) per capita in
South Asia, at $3,491 as of 2022, but it still places 153rd, and among the
poorest in the world. The total gross domestic product is only $2.898 billion,
and 178th according to IMF.

Bhutan's economy is closely aligned with India's through strong trade and
monetary links and dependence on India's financial assistance. Most production
in the industrial sector is of the cottage industry type. Most development
projects, such as road construction, rely on Indian migrant labour. Model
education, social, and environment programs are underway with support from
multilateral development organisations.

Each economic program takes into account the government's desire to protect
the country's environment and cultural traditions. For example, the
government, in its cautious expansion of the tourist sector, encourages visits
by upscale, environmentally conscientious tourists. Detailed controls and
uncertain policies in areas such as industrial licensing, trade, labour, and
finance continue to hamper foreign investment. Hydropower exports to India
have boosted Bhutan's overall growth, even though GDP fell in 2008 as a result
of a slowdown in India, its predominant export market.

Since 1961, the government of Bhutan has guided the economy through five-year
plans in order to promote economic development.

In the 1970s the King placed Gross National Happiness over Gross Domestic
Product.

On 8 December 2023, Bhutan graduated from the UN's list of least developed
countries (LDCs), making it only the 7th country to do so and the first in 3
years.

## Macro-economic trend

Trend of Gross Domestic Product of Bhutan at market prices reported by the IMF  
[_needs update_] Year | (millions of BTN) | (millions of USD)   
---|---|---  
1985 | 2,166 | 175   
1990 | 4,877 | 279   
1995 | 9,531 | 294   
2000 | 20,060 | 460   
2005 | 36,915 | 828   
2008 | 45,000 | 1,280   
2011 | 84,950 | 1,695   
2014 | 119,546 | 1,784   
2017 | 159,572 | 2,294   
  
Bhutan's hydropower potential and its attraction for tourists are key
resources. The Bhutanese Government has made some progress in expanding the
nation's productive base and improving social welfare.

In 2010, Bhutan became the first country in the world to ban smoking and the
selling of tobacco. In order to stamp out cross-border smuggling during the
pandemic, a new Tobacco Control Rules and Regulations (TCRR) 2021 allowed the
import, sales and consumption of tobacco products.

## Membership of economic organizations and agreements

In terms of trade, Bhutan is a member of the South Asian Free Trade Area
(SAFTA) and the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) and the South Asia Subregional Economic
Cooperation (SASEC). Bhutan is also a member of the pan-Asian Asia Cooperation
Dialogue (ACD), and the Asian Development Bank.

Bhutan first applied to join the WTO in 1999 and as an applicant, was quickly
granted observer status Beyond that, ascension proceedings at the WTO have
been much delayed and periodically put on pause, largely stemming from
concerns and considerations of the Bhutanese government itself. The Bhutanese
government approved ascension to the WTO in April 2023, at least partly
hastened by the country's upcoming graduation from the UN-defined 'least
developed country (LDC) category. Under WTO rules and processes, ascent of a
country with LDC status comes with some leniency in certain requirements, more
relaxed timeframes for compliance, and additional support; so, whilst the loss
of LDC status, as happened in December 2023, was a reflection of Bhutan's
success and development progress, it also meant much further delay in WTO
ascension (that is, ascent after the loss of LDC status) would make the
journey through to full WTO member status even harder.

## Modern economic resources

Since the early 2020s, Bhutan has adopted cryptocurrency, particularly
Bitcoin, as a strategic economic resource. Facing declining tourism revenue,
youth unemployment (which reached 19% in 2024), and a growing brain drain, the
government began mining Bitcoin using surplus hydropower during high-flow
summer months. By 2023, Bhutan had sold $100 million in cryptocurrency to
double civil servant salaries, leading to a drop in resignations. As of April
2025, blockchain analysts estimate Bhutan's Bitcoin holdings at over $600
million; around 30% of its GDP. Mining is powered by the kingdom's carbon-
negative hydropower and cool climate, aligning with its environmental values.
Bhutan also plans to develop Gelephu Mindfulness City, a sustainable economic
hub.