| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( December 2024)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy of Guyana** is one of the fastest growing economies in the
world, with a gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 19.9% in 2021. In 2024,
Guyana had a per capita gross domestic product (purchasing power parity) of
Int$80,137 and an average GDP growth of 4.2% over the previous decade.
Guyana's economy was transformed in 2015 with the discovery of an offshore oil
field in the country's waters about 190 km from Georgetown, making the first
commercial-grade crude oil draw in December 2019, sending it abroad for
refining.

## Overview

Developed in conjunction with the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), an economic recovery program significantly reduced the
government's role in the economy, encouraged foreign investment, enabled the
government to clear all its arrears on loan repayments to foreign governments
and the multilateral banks, and brought about the sale of 15 of the 41
government-owned (parastatal) businesses. The cellphone company and assets in
the timber, rice, and fishing industries also were privatized. International
corporations were hired to manage the huge state sugar company, GuySuCo, and
the most significant state bauxite mine. An American company was allowed to
open a bauxite mine, and two Canadian companies were permitted to develop the
largest open-pit gold mine in South America. However, efforts to privatize the
two state-owned bauxite mining companies, Berbice Mining Company and Linden
Mining Company have so far been unsuccessful.

Most price controls were removed, the laws affecting mining and oil
exploration were improved, and an investment policy receptive to foreign
investment was announced. Tax reforms designed to promote exports and
agricultural production in the private sector were enacted.

### Debt

Since 1986, Guyana has received its entire wheat supply from the United States
on concessional terms under a PL 480 Food for Peace programme. It is now
supplied on a grant basis. The Guyanese currency generated by the sale of the
wheat is used for purposes agreed upon by the U.S. and Guyana Governments. As
with many developing countries, Guyana is heavily indebted. Reduction of the
debt burden has been one of the present administration's top priorities. In
1999, through the Paris Club "Lyons terms" and the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) initiative Guyana managed to negotiate $256 million in debt
forgiveness.

In qualifying for HIPC assistance, for the first time, Guyana became eligible
for a reduction of its multilateral debt. About half of Guyana's debt is owed
to the multilateral development banks and 20% to its neighbour Trinidad and
Tobago, which until 1986 was its principal supplier of petroleum products.
Almost all debt to the U.S. government has been forgiven. In late 1999, net
international reserves were at $123.2 million, down from $254 million in 1994.
However, net international reserves had rebounded to $174.1 million by January
2001.

Guyana's extremely high debt burden to foreign creditors has meant limited
availability of foreign exchange and reduced capacity to import necessary raw
materials, spare parts, and equipment, thereby further reducing production.
The increase in global fuel costs also contributed to the country's decline in
production and growing trade deficit. The decline of production has increased
unemployment. Although no reliable statistics exist, combined unemployment and
underemployment are estimated at 30%.

Emigration, principally to the U.S. and Canada, remains substantial. Net
emigration in 1998 was estimated to be about 1.4 percent of the population,
and in 1999, this figure totalled 1.2 percent. After years of a state-
dominated economy, the mechanisms for private investment, domestic or foreign,
are still evolving. The shift from a state-controlled economy to a primarily
mixed economic system began under Desmond Hoyte and continued under PPP/CIVIC
governments. The current PPP/C administration recognizes the need for foreign
investment to create jobs, enhance technical capabilities, and generate goods
for export.

The foreign exchange market was fully liberalized in 1991, and currency is now
freely traded without restriction. The rate is subject to change on a daily
basis, but the Guyana dollar has depreciated 17.6% from 1998 to 2000 and may
depreciate further pending the stability of the post-election period.

## Economic history

### European settlement and plantation workforce

The Dutch were the first to settle Guyana in the 1600s, engaging in trade with
the Amerindians and establishing plantations. It was soon discovered that the
soil and climate were ideal for growing sugar cane and slaves from Africa were
brought in to work on these plantations. The colonies of the Guianas were
merged and taken into the British empire. When slavery was abolished, a new
wave of labour was brought from India as indentured servants. Politics was
greatly controlled by powerful plantation owners. Portuguese and Chinese also
came into the country as agricultural labour, but eventually settled into
their own specific service industries.

### Nationalization

When Guyana became independent from British rule, there was a great need to
ensure the economy was locally-owned after centuries of foreign involvement.
Socialist policies were of great interest at the time, and nearly every sector
of industry was nationalized during the Burnham presidency of the 1970s, with
new agencies established to support the poor and working class. Initially,
government investment was successful to aid growth, but lacked management
skills and was weak in the face of world commodity prices and competition.
Economic and political strife went hand in hand, and the population dwindled
from resulting waves of emigration.

### Opening of markets

The economy made dramatic progress after President Hoyte's 1989 economic
recovery program. As a result, Guyana's GDP increased 6% in 1991 following 15
years of decline. Growth was consistently above six percent until 1995, when
it dipped to 5.1 percent. The government reported that the economy grew at a
rate of 7.9 percent in 1996, 6.2 percent in 1997, and fell 1.3 percent in
1998. The 1999 growth rate was three percent. The unofficial growth rate in
2005 was 0.5 percent. In 2006, it was 3.2%.

## Infrastructure

Infrastructure is primarily concentrated on the coast, and there is difficulty
in building up industries in the hinterlands due to limitations of access and
energy.

## Major economic sectors

Agriculture and mining are Guyana's most important economic activities, with
sugar, bauxite, rice, and gold accounting for 70–75 percent of export
earnings. However, the rice sector experienced a decline in 2000, with export
earnings down 27 percent through the third quarter of 2000. Ocean shrimp
exports, which were heavily impacted by a one-month import ban to the United
States in 1999, accounted for only 3.5 percent of total export earnings that
year. Shrimp exports rebounded in 2000, representing 11 percent of export
earnings through the third quarter of 2000. Other exports include timber,
diamonds, garments, rum, and pharmaceuticals. The value of these other exports
is increasing.

### Agriculture

Sugar is the most historically important product of Guyana, however, the
industry has been in decline due to global competition and other factors. It
still is a major export, along with its related products molasses and rum.
Banks DIH and Demerara Distilleries are the countries' only distillers, but
Guyana is world's 14th largest exporter of rum.

In 2018, Guyana produced 1.2 million tons of sugar cane, 964 thousand tons of
rice, 136 thousand tons of coconut, in addition to smaller productions of
other products agricultural products, such as eggplant (47 thousand tons),
pepper (37 thousand tons), pineapple (34 thousand tons), banana (23 thousand
tons), orange (21 thousand tons), cassava (20 thousand tons), etc.

### Mining

Mining has surpassed the economic importance of sugar in recent years, making
up a sizable portion of Guyana's GDP. The large-scale gold and bauxite mining
operations are all foreign-owned, but the vast proportion of gold and diamond
mining is done by small and medium-scale miners.

### Petroleum

In the 2010's, significant off-shore oil finds by Exxon has renewed interest
in foreign investment in the country. A 2018 estimate predicts Guyana's
oilfields are holding over 3.2 billion barrels. Off-shore crude oil extraction
began in 2019.

By 2024, oil production in Guyana had soared to approximately 645,000 barrels
per day (bpd), marking a significant increase from 98,000 bpd in its initial
full year of production. Guyana increased crude oil production by an annual
average of 98,000 b/d from 2020 to 2023, making it the third-fastest growing
non-OPEC producing country during this period. The expansion of this sector
has significantly contributed to the national economy, with the petroleum
industry driving a 62.3 percent GDP growth in 2022, the highest globally
according to the IMF. Looking forward, Guyana plans to further boost its
production capacity to about 1.3 million bpd by 2027 through the development
of new projects like Yellowtail, Uaru, and Whiptail. In December 2024, Guyana
became the third largest per capita petroleum producing country in the world.

#### 2025

In the first quarter of 2025, Guyana’s Natural Resource Fund (NRF) received
USD 605.5 million in oil revenues, including seven profit oil payments and one
royalty payment. These payments were for oil produced from January to March
2025, with two payments related to December 2024 lifts. Despite an increase in
daily production, the country's earnings are expected to decline due to a
projected 10.9% drop in oil prices, forecasted at USD 71.9 per barrel for
2025. In 2024, Guyana's oil production grew by 57.7%, yielding 225.4 million
barrels and generating USD 2.6 billion in revenue. Under the 2016 Production
Sharing Agreement, Guyana receives a 2% share of oil sold and a 12.5% profit
share after ExxonMobil's expenses. The country is also set to have 246 oil
lifts in 2025.

### Forestry

Guyana contains the "largest unspoiled rainforests on the continent". Despite
the vast forests covering the country, the timber industry has remained small
due to infrastructural limitations such as undeveloped roads and lacking or
unreliable electricity to milling operations.

The country also sees large financial contributions from international
organizations looking to protect the forests.

### Fishing

Most of what is fished is consumed locally, but there is a sizable export
market for ocean shrimp. Overfishing of shrimp has led to Atlantic seabob
becoming the most commercially important catch. Commercial fishing is mostly
marine, as inland fishing is mostly attributed to subsistence fishing done by
Amerindians.

## Data

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2028 (with IMF
staff estimates for 2021–2028). Inflation below 3% is in green.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | **GDP** (in Bil. US$nominal) | **GDP per capita** (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 1.88  | 2,421.5  | 0.84  | 1,101.9  | -2.1%  | 14.1%  | 7.1%  | n/a   
1981  | 2.07  | 2,711.7  | 0.81  | 1,055.8  | 0.6%  | 22.2%  | 7.6%  | n/a   
1982  | 2.01  | 2,625.2  | 0.69  | 904.9  | -8.9%  | 20.6%  | 9.7%  | n/a   
1983  | 1.85  | 2,421.5  | 0.70  | 921.5  | -11.5%  | 15.3%  | 9.6%  | n/a   
1984  | 1.95  | 2,574.7  | 0.65  | 861.1  | 2.1%  | 25.1%  | 7.5%  | n/a   
1985  | 2.02  | 2,682.4  | 0.70  | 924.3  | 0.4%  | 15.0%  | 7.1%  | n/a   
1986  | 2.06  | 2,751.3  | 0.79  | 1,053.7  | -0.2%  | 7.9%  | 7.0%  | n/a   
1987  | 2.11  | 2,841.5  | 0.73  | 982.3  | -0.1%  | 28.7%  | 6.1%  | n/a   
1988  | 2.05  | 2,790.8  | 0.83  | 1,125.9  | -6.0%  | 33.9%  | 5.4%  | n/a   
1989  | 2.03  | 2,791.0  | 0.83  | 1,146.2  | -4.9%  | 89.5%  | 5.2%  | n/a   
1990  | 2.04  | 2,831.7  | 0.69  | 951.0  | -3.0%  | 64.3%  | 5.6%  | n/a   
1991  | 2.24  | 3,112.5  | 0.74  | 1,036.9  | 6.0%  | 103.1%  | 6.8%  | n/a   
1992  | 2.46  | 3,429.4  | 0.82  | 1,145.8  | 7.8%  | 26.7%  | 7.4%  | n/a   
1993  | 3.73  | 3,789.2  | 1.00  | 1,393.0  | 8.2%  | 8.4%  | 6.9%  | n/a   
1994  | 3.02  | 4,180.9  | 1.18  | 1,626.9  | 8.5%  | 12.4%  | 6.1%  | n/a   
1995  | 3.24  | 4,459.7  | 1.33  | 1,832.4  | 5.1%  | 12.2%  | 5.5%  | n/a   
1996  | 3.56  | 4,882.5  | 1.50  | 2,048.5  | 8.0%  | 7.1%  | 5.4%  | n/a   
1997  | 3.85  | 5,245.1  | 1.59  | 2,161.6  | 6.2%  | 3.6%  | 4.9%  | 101.4%   
1998  | 3.83  | 5,192.4  | 1.50  | 2,035.9  | -1.7%  | 4.6%  | 4.5%  | 108.0%   
1999  | 4.00  | 5,400.8  | 1.49  | 2,010.8  | 3.0%  | 7.5%  | 4.2%  | 97.1%   
2000  | 4.03  | 5,434.1  | 1.50  | 2,017.2  | -1.3%  | 6.1%  | 3.9%  | 97.2%   
2001  | 4.22  | 5,673.3  | 1.50  | 2,023.6  | 2.3%  | 2.6%  | 4.7%  | 104.6%   
2002  | 4.33  | 5,828.4  | 1.56  | 2,093.0  | 1.1%  | 5.4%  | 5.7%  | 105.1%   
2003  | 4.39  | 5,909.2  | 1.59  | 2,144.1  | -0.7%  | 6.0%  | 5.9%  | 95.6%   
2004  | 4.58  | 6,116.0  | 1.66  | 2,333.0  | 1.6%  | 4.7%  | 5.5%  | 91.8%   
2005  | 4.63  | 6,233.0  | 1.71  | 2,305.9  | -1.9%  | 6.9%  | 5.0%  | 90.7%   
2006  | 5.02  | 6,741.1  | 1.90  | 2,551.8  | 5.1%  | 6.7%  | 4.6%  | 74.5%   
2007  | 5.51  | 7,389.4  | 2.23  | 2,982.2  | 7.0%  | 12.2%  | 4.6%  | 47.0%   
2008  | 5.73  | 7,659.5  | 2.49  | 3,329.6  | 2.0%  | 8.1%  | 5.8%  | 47.6%   
2009  | 5.96  | 7,932.6  | 2.60  | 3,457.4  | 3.3%  | 3.0%  | 9.2%  | 51.7%   
2010  | 6.29  | 8,356.6  | 2.89  | 3,837.3  | 4.4%  | 4.3%  | 9.6%  | 52.5%   
2011  | 6.77  | 8,958.3  | 3.33  | 4,402.8  | 5.4%  | 4.4%  | 8.9%  | 51.2%   
2012  | 7.92  | 10,443.7  | 4.06  | 5,360.3  | 5.0%  | 2.4%  | 8.0%  | 44.3%   
2013  | 8.37  | 10,998.3  | 4.17  | 5,476.7  | 3.7%  | 1.9%  | 7.3%  | 41.1%   
2014  | 8.36  | 10,942.8  | 4.13  | 5,402.7  | 1.7%  | 0.7%  | 6.1%  | 38.3%   
2015  | 8.59  | 11,204.6  | 4.28  | 5,580.0  | 0.7%  | -0.9%  | 5.2%  | 41.8%   
2016  | 8.71  | 11,268.4  | 4.48  | 5,796.8  | 3.8%  | 0.8%  | 4.8%  | 43.8%   
2017  | 9.31  | 11,964.6  | 4.75  | 6,104.2  | 3.7%  | 1.9%  | 4.3%  | 42.9%   
2018  | 9.95  | 12,725.0  | 4.79  | 6,120.5  | 4.4%  | 1.3%  | 3.8%  | 47.0%   
2019  | 10.68  | 13,605.8  | 5.17  | 6,594.4  | 5.4%  | 2.1%  | 3.6%  | 43.6%   
2020  | 15.52  | 19,717.1  | 5.47  | 6,952.7  | 43.5%  | 1.2%  | 8.0%  | 51.1%   
2021  | 19.47  | 24,661.7  | 7.66  | 9,702.5  | 20.1%  | 3.3%  | 5.3%  | 43.2%   
2022  | 33.80  | 42,698.9  | 14.52  | 18,342.3  | 62.3%  | 6.5%  | 3.5%  | 27.8%   
2023  | 48.16  | 60,648.1  | 16.31  | 20,539.9  | 37.2%  | 6.6%  | 3.5%  | 29.8%   
2024  | 71.54  | 89,924.7  | 22.01  | 27,641.2  | 45.3%  | 5.5%  | 3.9%  | 24.2%   
2025  | 75.38  | 94,370.1  | 22.63  | 28,330.0  | 3.4%  | 5.0%  | 3.9%  | 24.1%   
2026  | 104.9  | 130,912.7  | 29.58  | 36,919.5  | 36.6%  | 5.0%  | 3.9%  | 18.9%   
2027  | 110.4  | 137,334.8  | 30.46  | 37,907.2  | 3.3%  | 5.0%  | 3.9%  | 18.8%   
2028  | 116.2  | 144,160.3  | 31.43  | 38,998.6  | 3.3%  | 5.0%  | 3.9%  | 18.6%