The **economy of New Zealand** is a highly developed free-market economy. It
is the 52nd-largest national economy in the world when measured by nominal
gross domestic product (GDP) and the 63rd-largest in the world when measured
by purchasing power parity (PPP). New Zealand has one of the most globalised
economies and depends greatly on international trade, mainly with China,
Australia, the European Union, the United States, Japan and Korea. New
Zealand's 1983 Closer Economic Relations agreement with Australia means that
the economy aligns closely with that of Australia. Among OECD nations, New
Zealand has a highly efficient and strong social security system; social
expenditure stood at roughly 19.4% of GDP.

Economy of New Zealand by sector and organisation type

New Zealand's diverse economy is made up of various types of informal and
formal organisations, divided between the public and private sectors. It has a
sizeable service sector, accounting for 73% of all GDP activity as of
2024[update]. As a large island nation New Zealand has abundant natural
resources and mineral wealth. Prominent manufacturing industries include
aluminium production, food processing, metal fabrication, wood and paper
products. Goods-producing industries accounted for 20% of GDP as of
2024[update]. The primary sector continues to dominate New Zealand's exports,
despite accounting for only 7% of GDP as of 2024[update]. The information
technology sector is growing rapidly.

The major capital market is the New Zealand Exchange (NZX). As of February
2023[update], NZX had a total of 338 listed securities, equity, debt and funds
with a combined market capitalisation of NZD $226 billion. New Zealand's
currency, the New Zealand dollar, also circulates in four Pacific Island
territories. The New Zealand dollar is the 10th-most traded currency in the
world.

## History

Agriculture (especially dairy farming – such as for the Fonterra plant shown)
is a major export earner An aerial view of the Kinleith Mill. Forestry exports
are an important component of New Zealand's economy.

For many years New Zealand's economy was built on a narrow range of
agricultural products, such as wool, meat and dairy. These products became New
Zealand's staple and most valuable exports, underpinning the success of the
economy, from the 1850s until the 1970s. For example, from 1920 to the late
1930s, the dairy export quota was usually around 35% of New Zealand's total
exports, and in some years made up almost 45%. Due to the high demand for
these primary products, manifested by the New Zealand wool boom of 1951, New
Zealand had one of the highest standards of living in the world for 70 years.

In the 1960s, prices for these traditional exports declined, and in 1973 New
Zealand lost its preferential trading position with the United Kingdom when
the latter joined the European Economic Community. Partly as a result, from
1970 to 1990, the relative New Zealand GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing
power declined from about 115% of the OECD average to 80%.

Between 1984 and 1993, New Zealand changed from a somewhat closed and
centrally controlled economy to one of the most open economies in the OECD. In
a process often referred to in New Zealand as Rogernomics, successive
governments introduced policies which dramatically liberalised the economy.

In 2005, the World Bank praised New Zealand as the most business-friendly
country in the world. The economy diversified and by 2008, tourism had become
the single biggest generator of foreign exchange.

### Early years

Prior to European settlement and colonisation of New Zealand, Māori had a
subsistence economy, the basic economic unit of which was the sub-tribe or
hapū in which labour was divided. From the 1790s, the waters around New
Zealand were visited by British, French and American whaling, sealing and
trading ships. Their crews traded European goods, including guns and metal
tools, for Māori food, water, wood, flax and sex. Their increasing lawlessness
and plans for formal settlement by the New Zealand Company were two of the
drivers behind the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840, which
established New Zealand as a colony. Settlers continued to be dependent on
Māori for food until the 1860s. From then immigrants became self-sufficient in
farming, and started quarrying a variety of minerals including gold, which was
discovered at Gabriel's Gully in Central Otago, leading to the Otago gold rush
in 1861. Settlements flourished in areas where these quarries were
established. In the 1880s, Dunedin became the richest city in the country
largely on the back of investments from the gold rush.

Sheep farming began in the Wairarapa but soon spread up and down the east
coast from Southland to the East Cape once rudimentary roads and transport
became available. Much of the land used for farming was taken or leased from
Māori. Sheep numbers grew quickly and by the mid-1850s, there were already a
million sheep in New Zealand; by the early 1870s, there were 10 million. Wool
became the first staple export, initially exported from the Wellington
settlement in the late 1850s, although unrefrigerated meat and dairy products
were exported as far as Australia.

In the 1870s, Julius Vogel was periodically both colonial treasurer and
premier. He viewed New Zealand as a "Britain of the South Seas" and began the
development of infrastructure in New Zealand investing heavily in roads,
railways, telegraphs and bridges funded by public borrowing. Progress slowed
after the collapse of the City of Glasgow Bank in 1878 which led to a
contraction in credit from London, the centre of the world's financial system
at the time. Economic activity was depressed for some years afterwards, until
refrigeration was introduced in 1882. This enabled New Zealand to start
exporting meat and other frozen products to the United Kingdom. Refrigeration
transformed and shaped the development of the economy but, in the process,
established New Zealand's economic dependence on Britain.

The success of refrigeration was directly related to the growth and
development of farming in the country. In the 19th century, the bulk of
economic activity was in the South Island of New Zealand. From around 1900,
dairy farming became increasingly viable in areas which were less suitable for
sheep, particularly in Northland, the Waikato and Taranaki. As dairying
developed, the North Island slowly became more important to the economy.
Britain became the sole market for meat and animal products in New Zealand,
owing to the increase in its land cultivation and farming. The dairy farming
can therefore be seen as a response to the powerful market demands in Europe,
transforming not only New Zealand's countryside, economy and production
techniques, but also causing migration in order to create the needed supply of
dairy farming.

### 20th century

The Reserve Bank of New Zealand was established as New Zealand's central bank
on 1 August 1934. Up until that time New Zealand's monetary policy had been
set in the United Kingdom, and the New Zealand Pound was issued by private
banks. A separate central bank gave New Zealand's government control of
monetary policy for the first time, although New Zealand remained part of the
sterling area by pegging its pound to the British pound sterling until the
introduction of the New Zealand dollar in 1967, after which the dollar was
instead pegged to the United States dollar, before being floated in 1985.

By the mid-20th century, pastoral-farming products made up more than 90% of
New Zealand's exports, 65% of which was going to Britain in the 1950s. As a
former colony, the United Kingdom provided New Zealand with preferential trade
quotas. This also enabled New Zealand to impose high tariffs on imported goods
from other countries. Tough import controls gave local manufacturers the
ability to produce similar products locally, broaden the base of jobs
available in New Zealand and still compete against higher priced imports.

This prosperity continued up to 1955 at which point Britain started phasing
out preferential quotas. From then on, what New Zealand received was dictated
by the free market. As a result, during the 1950s and 1960s the country's
standard of living began to slip as the export sector was no longer able to
pay for the level of imported goods required to meet the country's growing
consumerism.

Tiwai Point Aluminium Smelter, opened in 1971

Britain applied to join the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1961, but was
vetoed by the French. The government of Keith Holyoake reacted by attempting
to diversify New Zealand's export markets, signing the first free trade
agreement (Australia New Zealand Free Trade Agreement) in 1965, and opening
new diplomatic posts in Hong Kong, Jakarta, Saigon, Los Angeles and San
Francisco. Britain applied again to join the EEC in 1967, and entered into
negotiations for membership in 1970. Holyoake's deputy and successor, Jack
Marshall, (briefly Prime Minister in 1972) negotiated continued access for New
Zealand exports to the United Kingdom under the so-called "Luxembourg
Agreement".

Britain gained full membership of the EEC on 1 January 1973, and all trade
agreements with New Zealand came to an end, except the Luxembourg Agreement.
By the end of that year, only 26.8% of New Zealand's exports were to Britain.
This had a significant effect on the standard of living. In 1953, New Zealand
had the third highest standard in the world. By 1978, it had dropped to 22nd
place.

Having lost unrestricted access to its traditional market, New Zealand
continued to search for alternative export markets and diversify its economy.
The Government of Norman Kirk, who succeeded Marshall, put greater emphasis on
expanding New Zealand's trade, especially with South East Asia. Following the
Yom Kippur War in October 1973, an oil embargo was put in place by the Middle
Eastern oil exporters, leading to the 1973 oil crisis. This compounded New
Zealand's dire economic situation further. Inflation greatly increased as the
cost of transport and imported goods soared, causing standards of living to
decline.

#### Think Big

Following the 1979 energy crisis resulting from the Iranian Revolution of that
year, Robert Muldoon, the prime minister between 1975 and 1984, instituted an
economic strategy known as Think Big. Large scale industrial plants were
established based on New Zealand's abundant natural gas. A new range of
products for export such as ammonia, urea fertilizer, methanol and petrol were
produced and with greater use of electricity (with the electrification of the
North Island Main Trunk railway) with the goal that this would reduce New
Zealand's dependence on oil imports.

Other projects included the Clyde Dam on the Clutha River, which was built to
meet a growing demand for electricity, and the expansion of the New Zealand
Steel plant at Glenbrook.

The Tiwai Point Aluminium Smelter, which opened in 1971, was also upgraded as
part of the Think Big strategy and now brings in approximately NZ$1 billion in
exports every year.

Most of these projects turned out to be ill-timed as they came on line at the
same time as oil prices dropped during the 1980s oil glut. The price of crude
went from more than US$90 a barrel in 1980, to about US$30 a few years later.
Because these Think Big projects required massive borrowing to get started,
public debt soared from $4.2 billion in 1975 when Muldoon became prime
minister to $21.9 billion when he left office nine years later. Inflation
remained rampant, averaging 11% in the 1980s. Once Labour came to power in
1984, many of these projects were sold to private industry as part of a wider
sale of state-assets.

The Muldoon Government did, however, make some moves towards deregulation. For
example, in 1982 it removed the transport licensing restrictions on road
carriers carting goods more than 150 km, and turned the Railways Department
into a statutory corporation.

#### Rogernomics

> Between 1984 and 1993, New Zealand underwent radical economic reform, moving
> from what had probably been the most protected, regulated and state-
> dominated system of any capitalist democracy to an extreme position at the
> open, competitive, free-market end of the spectrum.

The Fourth Labour government, elected in July 1984, moved away from government
intervention in the economy and allowed free market mechanisms to dominate.
These reforms became known as "Rogernomics", named after minister of finance
from 1984 to 1988, Roger Douglas. The changes included making the Reserve Bank
independent of political decisions; performance contracts for senior civil
servants; public sector finance reform based on accrual accounting; tax
neutrality; subsidy-free agriculture; and industry-neutral competition
regulation. Government subsidies including agricultural subsidies were
eliminated; import regulations were loosened up; the exchange rate was
floated; and controls on interest rates, wages, and prices were removed; and
personal rates of taxation were reduced. Tight monetary policy and major
efforts to reduce the government budget deficit brought the inflation rate
down from an annual rate of more than 18% in 1987. The deregulation of
government-owned enterprises in the 1980s and 1990s reduced government's role
in the economy and permitted the retirement of some public debt.

New Zealand Dollar / Australian Dollar exchange rate

NZD / USD exchange rate

The new Government was faced with an exchange rate crisis the day after it was
elected. Speculators expected the change of government to result in a 20%
devaluation of the New Zealand dollar, which led to the 1984 New Zealand
constitutional crisis due to Muldoon's refusal to devalue, worsening the
currency crisis further. As a result, the dollar was floated on 4 March 1985,
allowing for the value of the dollar to change with the market. Prior to the
dollar being floated, the dollar was pegged against a basket of currencies.

Financial markets were deregulated and tariffs on imported goods lowered and
phased out. At the same time subsidies to many industries, notably
agriculture, were removed or significantly reduced. Income and company taxes
were reduced and the top marginal tax rate was reduced from 66% to 33%. These
were replaced by a comprehensive tax on goods and services (GST) initially set
at 10%, then increased to 12.5% in 1989 and to 15% in 2010. A surtax on
universal superannuation was also introduced. Many government departments were
corporatised, and from 1 April 1987 became State owned enterprises, required
to make a profit. The new corporations shed thousands of jobs adding to
unemployment; Electricity Corporation 3,000; Coal Corporation 4,000; Forestry
Corporation 5,000; New Zealand Post 8,000.

The wage and price freeze of the early eighties coupled with the removal of
financial restrictions and a lack of investment opportunities, led to a
speculative bubble on New Zealand's sharemarket, sharemarket crash of 1987, in
which New Zealand's sharemarket shed 60% from its 1987 peak, and taking
several years to recover.

New Zealand money supply and inflation

M3 money supply increases

Housing inflation

Consumer price index

Inflation continued to be a major problem afflicting the New Zealand economy.
Between 1985 and 1992, inflation averaged 9% per year and the economy was in
recession. The unemployment rate rose from 3.6% to 11%, New Zealand's credit
rating dropped twice, and foreign debt quadrupled. In 1989 the Reserve Bank
Act 1989 was passed, creating strict monetary policy under the sole control of
the Reserve Bank Governor. From then on the Reserve Bank focused on keeping
inflation low and stable, using the Official Cash Rate (OCR) – the price of
borrowing money in New Zealand – as its primary means to do so. As a result,
inflation rates fell to an average of 2.5% in the 1990s, compared to 12% in
the 1970s. However, the tightening of monetary policy contributed to rising
unemployment in the early 1990s.

The Labour Party was greatly divided over Rogernomics, especially following
the 1987 sharemarket crash and its effect on the economy, which slumped along
with the rest of the world into recession in the early 1990s. The National
Party was returned to power at the 1990 general election and Ruth Richardson
became minister of finance under Prime Minister Jim Bolger. The new Government
was again thrown a major economic challenge, with the then state-owned Bank of
New Zealand needing a bail-out to stay operational.

Richardson's first budget in 1991, nicknamed the 'Mother of all Budgets',
attempted to address constant fiscal deficits and borrowing by cutting state
spending. Unemployment and social welfare benefits were cut and 'market rents'
were introduced for state houses – in some cases tripling the rents of low-
income people. Richardson also introduced user-pays requirements in hospitals
and schools. These reforms became known derisively as Ruthanasia.

By this time, New Zealand's economy faced serious social problems; the number
of New Zealanders estimated to be living in poverty grew by at least 35%
between 1989 and 1992; and the economic benefits of privatisation have been
questioned. Gross domestic product per capita stagnated between 1986–87 and
1993–94, and by March 1992 unemployment rose to 11.1% Between 1985 and 1992,
New Zealand's economy grew by 4.7% during the same period in which the average
OECD nation grew by 28.2%. From 1984 to 1993 inflation averaged 9% per year,
New Zealand's credit rating dropped twice, and foreign debt quadrupled.
Between 1986 and 1993, the unemployment rate rose from 3.6% to 11%.

Since the deregulation of the postal sector, different postal operators can
install mail collection boxes in New Zealand's streets

Deregulation also created a business-friendly regulatory framework which has
benefited those able to take advantage of it. A 2008 survey in The Heritage
Foundation and _The Wall Street Journal_ ranked New Zealand 99.9% in "Business
freedom", and 80% overall in "Economic freedom", noting that it takes, on
average, only 12 days to establish a business in New Zealand, compared with a
worldwide average of 43 days.

Deregulation has also been blamed for other significant negative effects. One
of these was the leaky homes crisis, whereby the loosening up of building
standards (in the expectation that market forces would assure quality) led to
many thousands of severely deficient buildings, mostly residential homes and
apartments, being constructed over a period of a decade. The costs of fixing
the damage has been estimated at over NZ$11 billion (as at 2009[update]).

### 21st century

New Zealand gross domestic product and net international debt

Unemployment continued to fall from 1993 to 1994 fiscal year, until the onset
of the 1997 Asian financial crisis again pushed the rate higher. By 2016 the
unemployment rate decreased to 5.3 percent, the lowest level in 7 years.

Between 2000 and 2007, the New Zealand economy expanded by an average of 3.5%
a year driven primarily by private consumption and the buoyant housing market.
During this period, inflation averaged only 2.6% a year, within the Reserve
Bank's target range of 1% to 3%. However, in early 2008 the economy entered
recession, before the effects of the Great Recession set in later that year. A
drought over the 2007/08 summer led to lower production of dairy products in
the first half of 2008. Domestic activity slowed sharply over 2008 as high
fuel and food prices dampened domestic consumption, while high interest rates
and falling house prices drove a rapid decline in residential investment.

Around the world instability was developing in the finance sector. This
reached a peak in September 2008 when the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers
sparked the 2008 financial crisis.

#### Finance company collapses (2006–2012)

New Zealand bonds  
Inverted yield curve in 1994–1998 and 2004–2008

20 year

10 year

2 year

3 month

1 month

During the 2008 financial crisis, business and consumer confidence in New
Zealand plummeted as dozens of finance companies collapsed. To try and stop a
flight of funds from New Zealand institutions to those in Australia, the
Government established the Crown Retail Deposit Guarantee Scheme to cover
depositors funds in the event that a bank or finance company went broke. This
protected some investors but nevertheless, at least 67 finance companies
collapsed within a short period of time. The largest of these was South
Canterbury Finance which cost taxpayers NZ$1.58 billion when the company
collapsed in August 2010. The directors of many of these finance companies
were subsequently investigated for fraud and some high-profile directors went
to prison.

In an attempt to stimulate the economy, the Reserve Bank lowered the Official
Cash Rate (OCR) from a high of 8.25% (July 2008) to an all-time low of 2.5% at
the end of April 2009.

Fortunately for New Zealand, the recession was relatively shallow compared to
many other nations in the OECD, it was sixth least affected out of the 34
member nations with negative real GDP growth totalling 3.5%. In 2009 the
economy picked up, led by strong demand from major trading partners Australia
and China, and historically high prices for New Zealand's dairy and log
exports. In 2010 the GDP grew by a modest 1.6%, but over the next couple of
years economic activity continued to improve, driven by the rebuild in
Canterbury after the Christchurch earthquakes and recovery in domestic demand.
Through 2011, global conditions deteriorated and the terms of trade eased off
their 2011 peak, continuing to moderate until September 2012.

#### "Rock star" economy

In 2013, the economy grew 3.3%. HSBC chief economist for Australia and New
Zealand, Paul Bloxham, was so impressed that he predicted New Zealand's growth
would outpace most of its peers, and he described New Zealand as the "rock
star economy of 2014". Another financial commentator said the New Zealand
dollar was the "hottest" currency of 2014. Only three months later, the New
Zealand Productivity Commission expressed concern about low living standards
and problems affecting the long-term drivers of growth. Paul Conway, Director
of Economics and Research at the Productivity Commission, wrote: "New
Zealand's broad policy settings should generate GDP per capita 20 per cent
above the OECD average, but the actual result is more than 20 per cent below
average. We may be punching above our weight, but that's only because we are
in the wrong weight division!" In August, Bloxham admitted that "the sharp
decline in dairy prices over the last six months has clouded the outlook
somewhat". In December however Bloxham stated that he thought the New Zealand
economy would continue to grow strongly.

In 2014 increased attention was paid to the growing gap between rich and poor.
In _The Guardian_ , Max Rashbrook said policies implemented by both Labour and
National governments have increased inequality. He claims that for twenty
years outrage "has been muted", but "Alarm bells are finally beginning to
sound. Recent polling shows three-quarters of New Zealanders think theirs is
no longer an egalitarian country".

#### COVID-19 pandemic and recession (2020–22)

New Zealand recorded its first case of COVID-19 on 28 February 2020. In
response to the pandemic, the country closed its borders to everyone except
New Zealand citizens and residents on 19 March, and went into full lockdown
from 26 March to 27 April, followed by a partial lockdown from 28 April to 13
May.

The border closure combined with the lockdowns saw the retail, accommodation,
hospitality, and transport sectors experiencing major declines. On 17
September 2020, New Zealand officially entered a recession, with the country's
gross domestic product retracting by 12.2% in the June quarter. The GDP
rebounded 14% in the September quarter to leave a 2.2% year-on-year
retraction.

After successfully containing the virus, the New Zealand economy had sharp
growth in what is known as a V-shaped recovery and ended the year with an
overall economic expansion of 0.4%, better than the predicted 1.7%
contraction. Unemployment also dropped to 4.9% in December 2020, down from a
peak Covid effected rate of 5.3% in September.

Restrictions returned in late 2021 after COVID-19 was again present in New
Zealand and continued until late 2023.

By 23 September 2021, the Restaurant Association's Chief executive Marisa
Bidois estimated that about 1,000 hospitality businesses nationwide had been
forced to close as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, leading to the loss of
13,000 jobs. In response, the Association lobbied the Government for
Government for continued wage subsidies and incentives to boost customer
rates. On 13 November 2021, the _Bay of Plenty Times_ reported that 26,774
companies had been liquidated during the first eight months of 2021.

On 27 January 2022, New Zealand's inflation rate hit a 30-year record high of
5.9% at the end of 2021. According to figures released by Statistics New
Zealand, the rising cost of construction, petrol and rents pushed the consumer
price index up 1.4 per cent between October and December 2021. Statistics NZ
also recorded a two percent increase in household utilities expenses, which
was fuelled by the rising costs of new dwellings (which rose by 16% from 2020)
and a 30 percent hike in fuel prices (from NZ $1.87 per litre to $2.45 per
litre). Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern attributed the sharp inflation rate to
rising crude oil prices overseas. By contrast, the opposition National Party
leader Christopher Luxon and Finance spokesperson Simon Bridges attributed
rising inflation to the Government's "wasteful" spending.

On 1 February 2022, an annual report released by the Organisation of Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) identified the country's border
restrictions and declining house prices as the main risks facing New Zealand's
economy that year. While the OECD report credited New Zealand's elimination
strategy and macroeconomic stimuli such as wage and socio-economic subsidies
with helping the economy to bounce back to pre-COVID-19 levels, it also warned
that excessive Government spending was causing the economy to overheat and
substantial increases in household and government debt. The OECD welcomed the
Reserve Bank's decision to raise interest rates but also urged the Government
to raise the superannuation age, eliminate obstacles to building houses, and
reduce government spending. The OECD also supported the introduction of a
social insurance scheme for unemployed workers.

#### Post COVID-19 pandemic (2023–present)

After the last COVID-19 restrictions were abandoned in 2023, New Zealand
entered economic stagnation and recession. Continued inflation, interest rate
rises and low consumer spending lead to low-to-negative economic growth from
2022 through 2024.

## Overview

New Zealand balance of payments and international investment position – net
international debt

In 2015 the Social Progress Index, which covers such areas as basic human
needs, foundations of well-being, and the level of opportunity available to
citizens, ranked the New Zealand economy fifth in the world. However, the
outlook includes some challenges. New Zealand income levels, which used to be
above those of many countries in Western Europe prior to the crisis of the
1970s, dropped in relative terms and never recovered. As a result, the number
of New Zealanders living in poverty has grown and income inequality has
increased dramatically.

New Zealand has also had persistent current-account deficits since the early
1970s, peaking at −7.8% of GDP in 2006 but falling to −2.6% of GDP in FY
2014\. The CIA World Fact Book estimates New Zealand's 2017 public debt (that
owed by the government) at 31.7% of GDP. Between 1984 and 2006, net external
foreign debt increased 11-fold, to NZ$182 billion. As of 2018[update] gross
core crown debt was NZ$84,524 million or 29.5% of GDP and net core crown debt
was NZ$62,114 million or 21.7% of GDP.

New Zealand Government Gross Debt as percent of GDP 1860 to 2000 GDP per
capita development in Australia and New Zealand

Despite New Zealand's persistent current-account deficits, the balance on
external goods and services has generally been positive. In FY 2014, export
receipts exceeded imports by NZ$3.9 billion. There has been an investment
income imbalance or net outflow for debt-servicing of external loans. In FY
2014, New Zealand's investment income from the rest of the world was NZ$7
billion, versus outgoings of NZ$16.3 billion, a deficit of NZ$9.3 billion. The
proportion of the current-account deficit that is attributable to the
investment income imbalance (a net outflow to the Australian-owned banking
sector) grew from one third in 1997 to roughly 70% in 2008.

### Taxation

At the national level the Inland Revenue Department (IRD) collects tax in New
Zealand on behalf of the New Zealand Government. New Zealanders pay national
taxes on personal and business income, and on the supply of goods and services
(GST). There is no capital-gains tax, although certain "gains" such as profits
on the sale of patent rights are deemed to be income. Income tax does apply to
property transactions in certain circumstances, particularly speculation.
Local authorities manage and collect local property taxes (rates). Some goods
and services carry a specific tax, referred to as an  excise or a duty such as
alcohol excise or gaming duty. These are collected by a range of government
agencies such as the New Zealand Customs Service. There is no social security
(payroll) tax or land tax in New Zealand.

The 2010 New Zealand budget announced cuts to personal tax-rates, with the top
personal tax-rate reduced from 38% to 33% The cuts gave New Zealand the
second-lowest personal tax burden in the OECD. Only Mexico's citizens retained
a higher percentage-wise "take home" proportion of their salaries.

The cuts in income tax were estimated to reduce revenue by $2.46 billion. To
compensate, the National government raised GST from 12.5% to 15%. Treasury
figures show that top income-earners in New Zealand pay between 6% and 8% of
their income on GST. Those at the bottom end, earning less than $356 a week,
spend between 11% and 14% on GST. Based on these figures, _The New Zealand
Herald_ predicted that putting GST up to 15% would increase living costs for
the poor more than twice as much as for the rich.

### Corruption

New Zealand ranked 1st on the Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index (CPI) of 2017 with a score of 89 out of 100. In 2018 New
Zealand ranked 2nd on the Corruption Perceptions Index with a score of 87 out
of 100. In 2019, New Zealand ranked 1st on the Corruption Perceptions Index
with a score of 87 out of 100. Although New Zealand is one of the least
corrupt countries in the world, corruption still exists in New Zealand.

### Regional economies

Map of regions of New Zealand

In March 2024, Statistics New Zealand published details of the break-down of
gross domestic product in the regions of New Zealand for the year ended March
2023:

Region (map reference)  | GDP 2023  
(NZ$ million)  | Share of  
national GDP  | GDP per capita  
2023 (NZ$)  | GDP growth  
2022–23  
---|---|---|---|---  
Northland (1)  | 10,061  | 2.6%  | 49,710  |  +6.4%   
Auckland (2)  | 148,732  | 38.2%  | 86,734  |  +10%   
Waikato (3)  | 34,613  | 8.9%  | 67,028  |  +8.2%   
Bay of Plenty (4)  | 22,581  | 5.8%  | 64,462  |  +6.2%   
Gisborne (5)  | 2,665  | 0.7%  | 50,955  |  +5.5%   
Hawke's Bay (6)  | 11,385  | 2.9%  | 61,977  |  +7%   
Taranaki (7)  | 10,241  | 2.6%  | 80,072  |  +5.5%   
Manawatū-Whanganui (8)  | 15,289  | 3.9%  | 59,010  |  +7.1%   
Wellington (9)  | 47,465  | 12.2%  | 86,805  |  +6.9%   
**North Island** | **303,033** | **77.9%** | **76,645** | **+8.4%**  
Tasman / Nelson (10 / 11)  | 7,100  | 1.8%  | 62,277  |  +8%   
Marlborough (12)  | 3,947  | 1.0%  | 76,049  |  +10.4%   
West Coast (13)  | 2,095  | 0.5%  | 63,876  |  +7%   
Canterbury (14)  | 47,944  | 12.3%  | 72,620  |  +9%   
Otago (15)  | 16,755  | 4.3%  | 66,700  |  +9.8%   
Southland (16)  | 8,271  | 2.1%  | 80,148  |  +6.3%   
**South Island** | **86,112** | **22.1%** | **70,973** | **+8.8%**  
**New Zealand** | **389,145** | **100.0%** | **75,311** | **+8.5%**  
  
  1. **^** Nelson and Tasman are combined by Statistics New Zealand, but are separate regions.
  2. **^** Includes the Chatham Islands.

### Unemployment

Prior to the economic shock created by Britain's decision to join the European
Economic Community (EEC) in 1973, which removed the UK as New Zealand's
primary market for exports, unemployment in New Zealand was very low. A
recession and a collapse in wool prices in 1966 led to unemployment rising by
131%, but still represented only a 0.7% percentage point increase in the
unemployment rate.

After 1973, unemployment became a persistent economic and social issue in New
Zealand. Recessions from 1976 to 1978 and from 1982 to 1983 greatly increased
unemployment again. Between 1985 and 2012 the unemployment rate averaged
6.29%. After the stock market crash of 1987, unemployment rose 170% reaching
an all-time high of 11.20% in September 1991. The 1997 Asian financial crisis
sent unemployment upwards again, by 28%. By 2007 it had dropped again and the
rate stood at 3.5% (December 2007), its lowest level since the current method
of surveying began in 1986. This gave the country the 5th-best ranking in the
OECD (with an OECD average at the time of 5.5%). The low numbers correlated
with a robust economy and a large backlog of job positions at all levels.
Unemployment numbers are not always directly comparable between OECD nations,
as members do not all keep labour market statistics in the same way.

The percentage of the population employed has also increased in recent years,
to 68.8% of all inhabitants,[_when?_] with full-time jobs increasing slightly,
and part-time occupations decreasing in turn. The increase in the working
population percentage is attributed[_by whom?_] to increasing wages and higher
costs of living moving more people into employment.[_failed verification_] The
low unemployment also had some disadvantages, with many companies unable to
fill jobs.

Starting with the 2008 financial crisis, unemployment began to rise. This
trend continued until September 2012, reaching a high of 6.7%. It began to
recover after that point, sitting at 3.9% as of June 2019[update].

### Housing affordability

Shamubeel Eaqub, formerly a principal economist at the New Zealand Institute
of Economic Research (NZIER), said in 2014 that thirty years prior, an average
house in New Zealand cost two or three times the average household income.
House prices rose dramatically in the first years of the 21st century and by
2007, an average house cost more than six times household income.
International surveys in 2013 showed that housing was unaffordable in all
eight of New Zealand's major markets – "unaffordable" being defined as house
prices which are more than three times the median regional income.

Demand for property has been strongest in Auckland. In 2014 the average sales
price there went from $619,136 to $696,047, a rise of 12% in that 12-month
period alone. In 2015, prices rose another 14%. This made Auckland New
Zealand's least affordable market and one of the most expensive cities in the
world with houses costing 8 times the average income. Between 2012 and April
2016, the average Auckland home increased in price by just over two-thirds
reaching $931,000 – higher than the cost of an average home in Sydney.

As a result, more people are being priced out of the property market. Those on
low incomes are hardest hit, affecting many Maori and Pasifika. New Zealand's
relatively high mortgage-rates are exacerbating the problem making it
difficult for young people with steady jobs to buy their first home. According
to a 2012 submission made to the Housing Affordability Inquiry, escalating
house prices are also impacting on many middle income groups, especially those
with large families. Mortgage adviser Bruce Patten said the trend was
"disturbing" and added to the gap between the "haves and have-nots".

Property-analysis company CoreLogic said[_when?_] that 45% of house purchases
in New Zealand are now made by investors who already own a home, while another
28% are made by people moving from one property to another. Approximately 8%
of purchases go to overseas-based cash buyers – primarily Australians,
Chinese, and British – although most[_quantify_] economists believe that
foreign investment is currently[_when?_] too small to have a significant
effect on property prices.

Whether purchases are made by New Zealanders or by foreigners, it is generally
those who are already well off who are buying the bulk of properties on the
market. This has had a dramatic effect on home-ownership rates by Kiwis,
now[_when?_] at its lowest level since 1951. Even as recently as 1991, 76% of
New Zealand homes were occupied by their owners. By 2013, this had reduced to
63%, indicating that more and more people are having to rent.[_citation
needed_] Raewyn Cox, chief executive of the Federation of Family Budgeting,
says: "High prices and high interest rates (have) sentenced a rising number of
New Zealanders to be lifetime tenants" where they are "stuck in expensive
rental situations, heading towards retirement".

### Inequality

In the interwar and post-war periods, successive governments sponsored a
massive state housing programme

Between 1982 and 2011 New Zealand's gross domestic product grew by 35%. Almost
half of that increase went to a small group who were already the richest in
the country. During this period, the average income of the top 10% of earners
in New Zealand (those earning more than $72,000) almost doubled going from
$56,300 to $100,200. The average income of the poorest tenth increased by 13%
from $9700 to $11,000.

Statistics New Zealand, which keeps track of income disparity using the P80/20
ratio, confirms the increase in income inequality. The ratio shows the
difference between high household incomes (those in the 80th percentile) and
low household incomes (those in the 20th percentile). The inequality ratio
increased between 1988 and 2004, and decreased until the onset of the Great
Recession, increasing again to 2011 and then declining again from then. By
2013 the disposable income of high-income households was more than two-and-a-
half times larger than that of low-income households.

In 2020, the OECD gave New Zealand a Gini inequality coefficient of 0.320 or
25th (out of 37) in the OECD.

### Superannuation

New Zealand has a universal superannuation scheme. Only people who are aged 65
years old or over, are New Zealand citizens or permanent residents and who are
residing in New Zealand at the time of application are eligible. They must
also have lived in New Zealand for at least 10 years since they turned 20 with
five of those years being since they turned 50. Time spent overseas in certain
countries and for certain reasons may be counted for New Zealand
superannuation. New Zealand superannuation is taxed, the rate of which depends
on superannuitants' other income. The amount of superannuation paid depends on
the person's household situation. For a married couple the net tax amount is
set by legislation to be no less than 66% of net average wage.

Because of the growing number of elderly becoming eligible, superannuation
costs rose from $7.3 billion a year in 2008 to $10.2 billion in 2014. In 2011
there were twice as many children in New Zealand as elderly (65 and over); by
2051 there are projected to be 60% more elderly than children. In the ten
years from 2014, the number of New Zealanders over the age of 65 was projected
to grow by about 200,000.

This poses a significant problem for superannuation. The government gradually
increased the age of eligibility from 61 to 65 between 1993 and 2001. In that
year the Labour Government of Helen Clark introduced the New Zealand
Superannuation Fund (known as the "Cullen Fund" after Minister of Finance
Michael Cullen) to part-fund the superannuation scheme into the future. As at
October 2014, the fund managed NZ$27.11 billion, 15.9% of which it invested
within New Zealand.

In 2007 the same Government introduced a new individual saving-scheme, known
as KiwiSaver. KiwiSaver principally targets growing people's retirement
savings, but younger participants can also use it to save a deposit for their
first home. The scheme is voluntary, work-based and managed by private-sector
companies called "KiwiSaver providers". As of 2014[update] KiwiSaver had 2.3
million active members (60.9% of New Zealand's population under 65). NZ$4
billion was contributed annually, and a total of NZ$19.1 billion has been
contributed since 2007.

### Consumption

| This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( May
2021)_  
---|---  
  
New Zealanders see themselves as first-world consumers with first-world tastes
and habits – mitigated only slightly by the country's remoteness from main
global producers.

In 2023, New Zealand's Final Consumption Expenditure was 199.99 billion.

## Infrastructure

According to the National Infrastructure Unit of the Treasury, New Zealand
"...continues to face challenges to its infrastructure; all forms of
infrastructure are long-term investments, and change does not come about
easily or quickly." A report prepared for the Association of Consulting and
Engineering New Zealand in 2020 claimed that there was an infrastructure
deficit of $75 billion (about one quarter of GDP), following decades of under-
investment that began in the 1980s.

### Transport

Highways, rail lines and an inter-island ferry in central Wellington

New Zealand's transport infrastructure is "generally well developed."

#### Road network

The New Zealand state highway network consists of 11,000 km of road, with
5981.3 km in the North Island and 4924.4 km in the South Island, built and
maintained by the NZ Transport Agency, and paid for from general taxation and
fuel excise duty. Heavy road users must pay Road User Charges as well, there
is limited use of tolling on state highways. There is also 83,000 km of local
roads built and maintained by local authorities.

#### Railway network

The railway network is owned by state-owned enterprise KiwiRail and consists
of 3,898 km of railway line, built to the narrow gauge of 1,067 mm (3 ft 6
in). Of this, 506 km is electrified.

#### Airways

There are seven international airports and twenty-eight domestic airports. Air
New Zealand, 52% government-owned, is the national carrier and a state owned
enterprise. Airways New Zealand, another state owned enterprise, provides air
traffic control and communications.

#### Seaports

New Zealand has 14 international seaports.

### Telecommunications

Telephone booths in Dunedin

Present-day telecommunications in New Zealand include telephony, radio,
television, and internet usage. A competitive telecommunications market has
seen mobile prices drop to some of the lowest in the OECD. The copper wire and
fibre cable networks are mostly owned by Chorus Limited, a publicly listed
company. Chorus wholesales services to retail providers (such as Spark). In
the mobile sector, there are three operators: Spark, One NZ and 2degrees.

#### Internet

New Zealand has a high rate of internet use. As of October 2014[update], there
are 1,916,000 broadband connections and 65,000 dial-up connections in New
Zealand, of which 1,595,000 are residential and 386,000 are business or
government.

The Government has two plans to bring Ultra-Fast Broadband to 97.8% of the
population by 2019, and is spending NZ$1.35 billion on public-private
partnerships to roll out fibre-to-the-home connection in all main towns and
cities with population over 10,000. The program aims to deliver ultra-fast
broadband capable of at least 100 Mbit/s download and 50 Mbit/s upload to 75%
of New Zealanders by 2019. In total, 1,340,000 households in 26 towns and
cities will be connected.

Gigabit internet (1000 Mbit/s download speeds) was made available to the
entire Ultra-Fast Broadband (UFB) footprint on 1 October 2016, in an
announcement from Chorus.

A$300 million Rural Broadband Initiative (RBI) has also been introduced by the
Government, with the aim to bring broadband of at least 5 Mbit/s to 86% of
rural customers by 2016.

### Energy

From 1995 to 2013, the energy intensity of the economy per unit of GDP
declined by 25 percent. A contributing factor is the growth of relatively less
energy-intensive service industries. New Zealand will be potentially among the
main winners after the global transition to renewable energy is completed; the
country is placed very high – no. 5 among 156 countries – in the index of
geopolitical gains and losses after energy transition (GeGaLo Index).

#### Electricity

The electricity market is regulated by the Electricity Industry Participation
Code administered by the Electricity Authority (EA). The electricity sector
uses mainly renewable energy sources such as hydropower, geothermal power and
increasingly wind energy.

The 83% share of renewable energy sources makes New Zealand one of the most
sustainable economies in terms of electricity generation; in terms of total
energy consumption in the New Zealand economy, this represents the 30% that
comes from renewable sources. New Zealand suffers from a geographical
imbalance between electricity production and consumption. The most substantial
electricity generation (both existing and as remaining potential) is located
on the South Island and to a lesser degree in the central North Island, while
the main demand (which is continuing to grow) is in the northern North Island,
particularly the Auckland Region. This requires electricity to be transmitted
north through a power grid which is reaching its capacity more often.

### Water

As of 2021, almost all of the three waters assets (drinking water, stormwater
and wastewater) are owned by local councils and territorial authorities. There
are currently 67 different asset-owning organisations in total.

The challenges for local government include funding infrastructure deficits
and preparing for large re-investments that are estimated to require $110
billion over the next 30 to 40 years. There are also significant challenges in
meeting statutory requirements for the safety of drinking water, and the
environmental expectations for management of stormwater and wastewater.
Climate change adaptation, and providing for population growth add to these
challenges.

## Trade

As of 2024, New Zealand largest trading partners are China, Australia, the
European Union, the United States and Japan. Together, these five partners
account for 63% of New Zealand's two-way trade with China alone accounting for
over 30% of two-way trade. Total annual exports are worth over US $44 billion
well imports are worth over US $49 billion. New Zealand Trade and Enterprise
(NZTE) offers strategic advice and support to New Zealand businesses wanting
to export goods and services to other countries.

### Trade agreements

New Zealand Free trade agreements in force Free trade agreements concluded but
not in force  
---  
  
Since 1960s New Zealand has pursued free trade agreements with many countries
to diversify its export markets and increase the competitiveness of New
Zealand's exports to the world. As well as reducing barriers to trade, Trade
Agreements New Zealand has entered into are designed to ensure existing access
is maintained. Trade agreements establish rules by which trade can take place
and ensure regulators and officials in countries New Zealand is trading with
work closely together.

### China

China is New Zealand's largest trading partner, buying primarily meat, dairy
products and pine logs. In 2013, trade between New Zealand and China was worth
NZ$16.8 billion. This has occurred primarily because of soaring demand for
imported dairy products, following the Chinese milk scandal in 2008. Since
then demand for milk products has been so strong that in the 12 months to
March 2014, there was a 51% increase in total exports to China. The increase
was facilitated by the New Zealand–China Free Trade Agreement which came into
force on 1 October 2008. Since that year exports to China have more than
tripled.

### Australia

Australia New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement 28 March 1983
– signed by Laurie Francis & Lionel Brown

Australia was New Zealand's largest bilateral trading partner in 2013, when
trade between the two countries was worth NZ$25.6 billion, and before China
overtook Australia. Economic and trading links between Australia and New
Zealand are underpinned by the "Closer Economic Relations" (CER) agreement,
which allows for free trade in goods and most services. Since 1990, CER has
created a single market of more than 25 million people. Australia is now the
destination of 19% of New Zealand's exports, including light crude oil, gold,
wine, cheese and timber, as well as a wide range of manufactured items.

The CER also creates a free labour market which allows New Zealand and
Australian citizens to live and work freely in each other's country together
with mutual recognition of professional qualifications. This means individuals
who are registered to practise an occupation in one country can register to
practise an equivalent occupation in the other country. Banking regulation and
supervision are co-ordinated through the Trans-Tasman Council on Banking
Supervision and there are also ongoing discussions about co-ordinating
Australian and New Zealand business law.

### European Union

The European Union is New Zealand's third largest trading partner. A growing
number of New Zealand companies use the United Kingdom as a base to supply
their products to the European market. However trade with the European Union
is declining as demand from Asia continues to grow. The EU takes only 8% of
New Zealand exports but provides around 12% of imports.

In July 2014, negotiations on the Partnership Agreement on Relations and
Cooperation (PARC) between New Zealand and the European Union were concluded.
The agreement covers the trade and economic relationship between the EU and
New Zealand with a view to further liberalisation of trade and investment and
acknowledges the intention of the European Union to upgrade its diplomatic
presence in New Zealand with a resident ambassador. In 2024 a New Zealand-
European Union free trade agreement entered into force.

### United States

The United States was New Zealand's third largest trading partner in 2013,
when bilateral trade between the two countries was valued at NZ$11.8 billion,
and before it was overtaken by the EU. New Zealand's main exports to the
United States are beef, dairy products and lamb. Imports from the US include
specialised machinery, pharmaceutical products, oil and fuel. In addition to
trade, there is a high level of corporate and individual investment between
the two countries and the US is a major source of tourists coming to New
Zealand. In March 2012, the United States had a total of $44 billion invested
in New Zealand. A number of US companies have subsidiary branches in New
Zealand. Many operate through local agents, with some joint venture
associations. The United States Chamber of Commerce is active in New Zealand,
with a main office in Auckland and a branch committee in Wellington.

According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, New Zealand and the United
States "share a deep and longstanding friendship based on a common heritage,
shared values and interests, and a commitment to promoting a free, democratic,
secure and prosperous world". This common background has not translated into a
free trade agreement between the two countries.

### Japan, Korea and other Asian economies

Japan is New Zealand's fourth largest trading partner. In the 21st century,
Asian economies have been developing rapidly providing significant demand for
New Zealand's exports. Korea, as New Zealand's fifth largest trading partner,
is also one of important sources of importation of New Zealand and considered
as important export market for New Zealand.

New Zealand also trades with Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Indonesia,
Singapore, Thailand, India and the Philippines and this now accounts for
around 16% of total exports. New Zealand initiated a free trade agreement with
Singapore in September 2000 which was extended in 2005 to include Chile and
Brunei and is now known as the P4 agreement.

### Relationship with Pacific Islands

The Pacific region with numerous islands is New Zealand's sixth largest
trading market and is growing every year. In 2011 exports to Pacific Islands
were worth over $1.5 billion up 12% on the previous year. Fiji is the biggest
individual market followed very closely by Papua New Guinea, French Polynesia
and New Caledonia. Goods exported to the islands include refined oil,
construction materials, medicines, sheep meat, milk, butter, fruit and
vegetables. New Zealand also assists Pacific Islands with defence and regional
security, and with management of the environment and fisheries.

Because of their small size, the Pacific Islands are some of the most
vulnerable environments in the world and are on the receiving end of numerous
cyclones every year. When disasters occur, they often have severe social and
economic effects which last for years. Since 1992, New Zealand has co-operated
with Australia and France to respond to disasters in the Pacific. New Zealand
provides emergency supplies and transport, funding for roading and housing and
the deployment of specialists to affected areas.

Through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, New Zealand also provides
international aid and development funding to help stimulate sustainable
economic development in underdeveloped economies. The New Zealand Aid
Programme, allocated about $550m a year, is focused primarily on promoting
development in the Pacific. The allocation of $550 million represents about
0.26% of New Zealand's gross national income (GNI).

## Foreign investment

New Zealand welcomes and encourages foreign investment, which is overseen by
the Overseas Investment Office. In 2014 foreign direct investment totalled
NZ$107.69 billion. Between 1989 and 2013, foreign investment increased from
NZ$9.7 billion to NZ$101.4 billion – a change of over 1,000%. Between 1989 and
2007, foreign ownership of the New Zealand sharemarket went from 19% to 41%
but has since dropped back to 33%. [_citation needed_]

In 2014, around 7% of all agriculturally productive land in New Zealand was
foreign-owned. In 2011, economist Bill Rosenberg claimed that the figure was
closer to 9% when including foreign ownership of forestry land. In March 2013,
the financial sector, which includes the "big-four" Australian-owned banks,
was worth NZ$39.3 billion – the largest share of the NZ$101.4 billion of
foreign ownership of New Zealand companies at the time.

### Impact

Between 1997 and 2014, foreign investors made NZ$50.3 billion profit, 68% of
which went overseas. The Campaign Against Foreign Control of Aotearoa (CAFCA)
says this has a negative impact on the economy, arguing that when foreign
investors buy up New Zealand companies, they tend to cut staff and push down
wages. It is also argued that growing foreign ownership has done nothing to
reduce New Zealand's foreign debt. In 1984, private and public foreign debt
was NZ$16 billion (NZ$50 billion in March 2013 dollars), which was less than
half New Zealand's GDP at the time. By March 2013, total foreign debt stood at
NZ$251 billion, well over 100% of New Zealand's GDP.

At the Singapore International Energy Week (SIEW) conference, leaders from New
Zealand and Cambodia highlighted the challenge of maintaining public support
for clean energy transitions due to rising electricity costs. They emphasized
the importance of balancing affordability with sustainability to ensure long-
term success.

## Data

Tourism, like here on the Milford Sound (special bus with viewing gallery), is
a major export earner for New Zealand

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2022 (with IMF
staff estimates in 2023–2026) from the May 2023 IMF World Economic Outlook
report. Inflation below 2% is green.

Year  | GDP  
(bil. US$) | GDP per capita  
(US$) | GDP  
(bil. US$) | GDP per capita  
(US$) | GDP growth  
(real) | Inflation rate  
(%) | Unemployment  
(%) | Government debt  
as % of GDP  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
(PPP)  | (Nominal)   
1980  | 28.5  | 9,176.3  | 22.6  | 7,257.5  | 1.0%  | 17.1%  | 4.0%  | n/a   
1981  | 32.1  | 10,287.7  | 23.5  | 7,514.1  | 3.0%  | 15.5%  | 3.9%  | n/a   
1982  | 35.1  | 11,150.8  | 23.2  | 7,381.3  | 2.9%  | 16.1%  | 4.4%  | n/a   
1983  | 36.4  | 11,463.5  | 22.5  | 7,074.6  | -0.1%  | 7.4%  | 6.2%  | n/a   
1984  |  40.4  |  12,565.3  |  22.4  |  6,970.9  |  6.9%  |  6.1%  |  7.2%  | n/a   
1985  | 42.1  | 12,993.8  | 22.5  | 6,953.6  | 1.2%  | 15.4%  | 3.9%  | 64.1%   
1986  |  43.8  |  13,373.6  |  27.4  |  8,385.8  |  1.8%  |  13.2%  |  4.2%  |  68.5%   
1987  |  45.9  |  13,915.0  |  37.0  |  11,205.9  |  2.4%  |  15.8%  |  4.2%  |  62.9%   
1988  |  47.8  |  14,353.2  |  45.5  |  13,663.6  |  0.6%  |  6.4%  |  5.8%  |  54.7%   
1989  |  49.9  |  14,826.9  |  44.0  |  13,079.0  |  0.4%  |  5.7%  |  7.3%  |  55.0%   
1990  |  51.8  |  15,204.9  |  45.8  |  13,447.6  |  0.0%  |  6.1%  |  8.0%  |  55.4%   
1991  |  52.8  |  15,111.8  |  43.4  |  12,424.8  |  -1.3%  |  2.6%  |  10.6%  |  58.0%   
1992  |  54.4  |  15,401.1  |  41.5  |  11,752.0  |  0.7%  |  1.0%  |  10.7%  |  58.7%   
1993  |  58.6  |  16,401.4  |  44.8  |  12,537.7  |  5.2%  |  1.3%  |  9.8%  |  54.6%   
1994  |  63.2  |  17,452.4  |  52.9  |  14,612.4  |  5.6%  |  1.7%  |  8.4%  |  48.9%   
1995  |  67.7  |  18,414.5  |  62.2  |  16,932.7  |  4.9%  |  3.8%  |  6.5%  |  43.5%   
1996  |  71.7  |  19,212.1  |  69.1  |  18,506.4  |  4.1%  |  2.3%  |  6.3%  |  37.3%   
1997  |  74.8  |  19,763.8  |  68.9  |  18,206.2  |  2.4%  |  1.2%  |  6.9%  |  34.6%   
1998  |  75.9  |  19,893.4  |  56.8  |  14,889.8  |  0.4%  |  1.3%  |  7.7%  |  34.5%   
1999  |  80.4  |  20,961.2  |  58.9  |  15,348.8  |  4.5%  |  -0.1%  |  7.1%  |  32.0%   
2000  |  85.7  |  22,207.2  |  54.1  |  14,021.9  |  4.2%  |  2.6%  |  6.2%  |  30.0%   
2001  |  89.9  |  23,121.0  |  53.1  |  13,669.3  |  2.5%  |  2.6%  |  5.5%  |  28.2%   
2002  |  95.6  |  24,183.4  |  62.1  |  15,706.7  |  4.7%  |  2.7%  |  5.3%  |  26.4%   
2003  |  101.8  |  25,263.5  |  82.4  |  20,460.3  |  4.4%  |  1.8%  |  4.8%  |  24.7%   
2004  |  109.6  |  26,793.4  |  101.6  |  24,848.8  |  4.8%  |  2.3%  |  4.0%  |  22.5%   
2005  |  116.6  |  28,196.4  |  113.3  |  27,385.5  |  3.2%  |  3.0%  |  3.8%  |  20.8%   
2006  |  123.6  |  29,531.6  |  109.7  |  26,219.9  |  2.8%  |  3.4%  |  3.9%  |  18.4%   
2007  |  131.4  |  31,091.1  |  134.9  |  31,914.3  |  3.5%  |  2.4%  |  3.6%  |  16.3%   
2008  |  133.5  |  31,311.6  |  135.4  |  31,762.9  |  -0.4%  |  4.0%  |  4.0%  |  19.0%   
2009  |  132.8  |  30,843.0  |  121.7  |  28,270.4  |  -1.1%  |  2.1%  |  5.9%  |  24.3%   
2010  |  136.7  |  31,402.2  |  145.4  |  33,393.0  |  1.7%  |  2.3%  |  6.2%  |  29.7%   
2011  |  142.0  |  32,376.0  |  166.9  |  38,061.5  |  1.8%  |  4.0%  |  6.1%  |  34.7%   
2012  |  144.4  |  32,733.7  |  175.0  |  39,683.6  |  2.5%  |  1.1%  |  6.5%  |  35.7%   
2013  |  157.7  |  35,467.7  |  187.1  |  42,081.3  |  2.3%  |  1.1%  |  5.8%  |  34.6%   
2014  |  167.2  |  36,995.9  |  200.2  |  44,284.7  |  3.8%  |  1.2%  |  5.4%  |  34.2%   
2015  |  170.7  |  36,995.3  |  176.3  |  38,224.6  |  3.6%  |  0.3%  |  5.4%  |  34.2%   
2016  |  185.1  |  39,254.6  |  185.9  |  39,415.0  |  3.9%  |  0.6%  |  5.2%  |  33.4%   
2017  |  197.1  |  40,932.7  |  203.6  |  42,290.0  |  3.3%  |  1.9%  |  4.8%  |  31.1%   
2018  |  208.7  |  42,564.4  |  209.6  |  42,757.1  |  3.5%  |  1.6%  |  4.3%  |  28.1%   
2019  |  218.7  |  43,864.4  |  210.8  |  42,274.2  |  3.1%  |  1.6%  |  4.1%  |  31.8%   
2020  |  218.5  |  42,970.5  |  210.3  |  41,341.1  |  -1.4%  |  1.7%  |  4.6%  |  43.3%   
2021  |  241.4  |  47,235.7  |  249.7  |  48,861.5  |  5.6%  |  3.9%  |  3.8%  |  47.5%   
2022  |  264.6  |  51,622.6  |  242.4  |  47,284.1  |  2.4%  |  7.2%  |  3.3%  |  47.2%   
Projected  
2023  |  276.0  |  52,676.5  |  249.0  |  47,536.7  |  0.6%  |  5.7%  |  3.7%  |  45.9%   
2024  |  285.6  |  53,797.3  |  257.6  |  48,530.8  |  1.0%  |  3.1%  |  5.0%  |  47.4%   
2025  |  296.3  |  55,145.9  |  266.8  |  49,644.8  |  2.0%  |  2.5%  |  5.4%  |  48.7%   
2026  |  309.2  |  56,843.4  |  277.7  |  51,049.1  |  2.4%  |  2.4%  |  5.2%  |  48.8%   
  
Industrial production growth rate

    5.9% (2004) / **1.5% (2007)**
Household income or consumption by percentage share

    

  * Lowest 10%: **0.3% (1991)**
  * Highest 10%: **29.8% (1991)**

Agriculture – products

    Wheat, barley, potatoes, pulses, fruits, vegetables; wool, beef, dairy products; fish
Exports – commodities

    Dairy products, meat, wood and wood products, fish, machinery
Imports – commodities

    Machinery and equipment, vehicles and aircraft, petroleum, electronics, textiles, plastics
Electricity

    

  * Consumption: 34.88 TWh (2001) / **37.39TWh (2006)**
  * Production: 38.39 TWh (2004) / **42.06TWh (2006)**
  * Exports: **0kWh (2006)**
  * Imports: **0kWh (2006)**

Electricity – production by source

    

  * Hydro: **60% (2020)**
  * Geothermal: **17% (2020)**
  * Wind: **5% (2020)**
  * Fossil fuel: **17% (2020)**
  * Nuclear: **0% (2020)**
  * Other: **3.4% (2010)**

Oil

    

  * Production: 42,160 barrels (6,703 m3) 2001 / **25,880 barrels (4,115 m 3) 2006**
  * Consumption: 132,700 barrels (21,100 m3) 2001 / **156,000 barrels (24,800 m 3) 2006**
  * Exports: 30,220 barrels (4,805 m3) 2001 / **15,720 barrels (2,499 m 3) 2004**
  * Imports: 119,700 barrels (19,030 m3) 2001 / **140,900 barrels (22,400 m 3) 2004**
  * Proven reserves: **89.62 million barrels (14,248,000 m 3) January 2002**

Exchange rates

    _New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1_ – 1.4771 (2016), 1.2652 (2012), 1.3869 (2005), 1.5248 (2004), 1.9071 (2003), 2.1622 (2002), 2.3788 (2001), 2.2012 (2000), 1.8886 (1999), 1.8632 (1998), 1.5083 (1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235 (1995)