The **economy of Laos** is a lower-middle income developing economy. Being a
communist state, the Lao economic model bears some resemblance to the Chinese
and Vietnamese economies, in that it has implemented market-based economic
practices while maintaining a degree of state control and welcoming foreign
direct investment.

Following the Civil War, Laos established a Soviet-type planned economy. As
part of economic restructuring that aimed to integrate Laos into the
globalized world market, the country underwent reforms called the "New
Economic Mechanism" in 1986 that decentralized government control and
encouraged private enterprise alongside state-owned enterprises. As of 2007,
Laos averaged 8% a year in GDP growth. It was forecasted that Laos would
sustain at least 7% growth through 2019.

The key goals for the government included pursuing poverty reduction and
education for all children, with an initiative to become a "land-linked"
country. This was showcased through the construction of the nearly $6 billion
high-speed rail from Kunming, China to Vientiane, Laos. The country opened a
stock exchange, the Lao Securities Exchange, in 2011, and has become a
regional player in its role as a hydroelectric power supplier to its neighbors
China, Thailand, and Vietnam. The Lao economy relies on Foreign direct
investment to attract capital from overseas. The long-term goal of the Lao
economy, as enshrined in the constitution, is economic development in the
direction of socialism.

Laos has hydropower resources; the country has potential for hydro- and solar
power. Excess electricity from hydropower is exported to other countries. The
country relies on coal in its electricity production.

## History

Seizure of power by the Communists resulted in the withdrawal of mainly
American external investment, on which the country had become dependent as a
result of the destruction of domestic capital during the Indochina Wars.

With the revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, in 1991,
the PDR Lao government reached an agreement with the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund on reforms. The government agreed to introduce
fiscal and monetary reform, promote private enterprise and foreign investment,
privatize or close state firms, and strengthen banking. It agreed to maintain
a market exchange rate, reduce tariffs, and eliminate unneeded trade
regulations. A liberal foreign investment code was enacted. Enforcement of
intellectual property rights is governed by 2 Prime Minister's Decrees dating
from 1995 and 2002.

The economy continues to be dominated by an agricultural sector operating
largely outside the money economy and in which the public sector continues to
play a dominant role. A number of private enterprises have been founded in
industries such as handicrafts, beer, coffee and tourism[_usurped_]. With
United Nations, Japanese, and German support, a formerly state-controlled
chamber of commerce aims to promote private business: the Lao National Chamber
of Commerce and Industry and its provincial subdivisions.

A round of state-owned enterprise reform in 2019 aims to ensure that the
remaining SOEs become profitable ventures that are efficient and sustainable
sources of income for the national treasury. These measures include closing
unproductive enterprises, ensure businesses in which the state has investments
are reformed into profitable ventures, and reduce corruption. As of 2019, the
State-Owned Enterprise Development and Insurance Department of the Lao
government has 183 enterprises under its supervision.

Laos faced an economic crisis in 2022. Caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and
external debt primarily from China, it escalated into inflation and a debt
crisis, bringing the country to the brink of default. A World Bank report
finds that the economic instability "largely results from low revenue and
accumulated debt. There is moreover a need to improve the efficiency of public
expenditure and tackle the potential costs of state-owned enterprises and
public-private partnerships.” The Lao kip currency value has fallen and
inflation remains higher than before the pandemic. The same World Bank report
states that "the main factor in the kip’s falling value has been the lack of
foreign currency available (...) a result of the need to repay large external
debts, despite some deferrals, and limited capital inflows." The per capita
GDP of Laos has gone down from $2,595 in 2021 to $1,824 in 2023 because of the
kip’s depreciation.

## Agriculture

In 2012, the Laos government issued a 4-year moratorium for new mining
projects. The reasons cited were environmental and social concerns relating to
the use of agricultural land.

In 2019 Laos produced:

  * 3.4 million tons of rice;
  * 3.1 million tons of roots and tubers;
  * 2.2 million tons of cassava;
  * 1.9 million tons of sugarcane;
  * 1.5 million tons of vegetable;
  * 1.0 million tons of banana;
  * 717 thousand tons of maize;
  * 196 thousand tons of watermelon;
  * 165 thousand tons of coffee;
  * 154 thousand tons of taro;
  * 114 thousand tons of sweet potato;
  * 56 thousand tons of tobacco;
  * 53 thousand tons of peanut;
  * 46 thousand tons of orange;
  * 43 thousand tons of pineapple;
  * 23 thousand tons of papaya;
  * 8.6 thousand tons of tea;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

## Tourism

As of 2011, tourism was the fastest-growing industry in the Lao economy. The
government opened Laos to the world in the 1990s.

## Other statistics

Of the total foreign investment in Laos in 2012, the mining industry got 27%
followed by electricity generation which had a 25% share.