The economy of Canada is a highly developed mixed economy. It is the world's
ninth-largest as of 2024[update] with a nominal GDP of approximately US$2.117
trillion. Canada is one of the world's largest trading nations, with a highly
globalized economy. In 2021, Canadian trade in goods and services reached
$2.016 trillion. Canada's exports totalled over $637 billion, while its
imported goods were worth over $631 billion, of which approximately $391
billion originated from the United States. In 2018, Canada had a trade deficit
in goods of $22 billion and a trade deficit in services of $25 billion. The
Toronto Stock Exchange is the tenth-largest stock exchange in the world by
market capitalization, listing over 1,500 companies with a combined market
capitalization of over US$3 trillion.

Canada has a strong cooperative banking sector, with the world's highest per-
capita membership in credit unions. It ranks low in the Corruption Perceptions
Index (12th in 2023) and "is widely regarded as among the least corrupt
countries of the world". It ranks high in the Global Competitiveness Report
(14th in 2019) and Global Innovation Indexes (15th in 2022). Canada's economy
ranks above most Western nations on The Heritage Foundation's Index of
Economic Freedom and experiences a relatively low level of income disparity.
The country's average household disposable income per capita is "well above"
the OECD average. Canada ranks among the lowest of the most developed
countries for housing affordability[_dubious – discuss_] and foreign direct
investment. Among OECD members, Canada has a highly efficient and strong
social security system; social expenditure stood at roughly 23.1% of GDP.

Since the early 20th century, the growth of Canada's manufacturing, mining,
and service sectors has transformed the nation from a largely rural economy to
an urbanized, industrial one. Like many other developed countries, the
Canadian economy is dominated by the service industry, which employs about
three-quarters of the country's workforce. Among developed countries, Canada
has an unusually important primary sector, of which the forestry and petroleum
industries are the most prominent components. Many towns in northern Canada,
where agriculture is difficult, are sustained by nearby mines or sources of
timber. Canada spends around 1.70% of GDP on advanced research and development
across various sectors of the economy.

Canada's economic integration with the United States has increased
significantly since World War II. The Automotive Products Trade Agreement of
1965 opened Canada's borders to trade in the automobile manufacturing
industry. In the 1970s, concerns over energy self-sufficiency and foreign
ownership in the manufacturing sectors prompted the federal government to
enact the National Energy Program (NEP) and the Foreign Investment Review
Agency (FIRA). The government abolished the NEP in the 1980s and changed the
name of FIRA to Investment in Canada to encourage foreign investment. The
Canada – United States Free Trade Agreement (FTA) of 1988 eliminated tariffs
between the two countries, while the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) expanded the free-trade zone to include Mexico in 1994 (later replaced
by the Canada–United States–Mexico Agreement). As of 2023, Canada is a
signatory to 15 free trade agreements with 51 countries.

Canada is one of the few developed nations that are net exporters of energy.
Atlantic Canada possesses vast offshore deposits of natural gas, and Alberta
hosts the fourth-largest oil reserves in the world. The vast Athabasca oil
sands and other oil reserves give Canada 13 percent of global oil reserves,
constituting the world's third or fourth-largest. Canada is additionally one
of the world's largest suppliers of agricultural products; the Canadian
Prairies are one of the most important global producers of wheat, canola, and
other grains. The country is a leading exporter of zinc, uranium, gold,
nickel, platinoids, aluminum, steel, iron ore, coking coal, lead, copper,
molybdenum, cobalt, and cadmium. Canada has a sizeable manufacturing sector
centred in southern Ontario and Quebec, with automobiles and aeronautics
representing particularly important industries. The fishing industry is also a
key contributor to the economy.

## Overview

Part of a series on the  
---  
Economy of Canada  
Economic history

  * Banking history
  * Petroleum history
  * Energy policy of Canada
  * Canadian dollar

  
Sectors

Primary sector

    

  * Agriculture
  * Energy
    * Petroleum
    * Electricity
  * Mining
  * Fishing
  * Forestry

Secondary sector

    

  * Automotives

Tertiary sector

    

  * Social programs
  * Transport
  * Tourism

Finance

    

  * Central Bank
  * Banking in Canada
  * Stock exchanges

Companies

    

  * Companies listed on the TSX

  
Economy by province

  * Alberta
  * Ontario
  * Quebec
  * Saskatchewan
  * _more..._

  
Economy by city

  * Montreal
  * Toronto
  * Vancouver
  * _more..._

  
  
  * Canada portal

  
  
With the exception of a few island nations in the Caribbean, Canada is the
only North American country to use the parliamentary system of government. As
a result, Canada has developed its own social and political institutions,
distinct from most other countries in the world. Though the Canadian economy
is closely integrated with the American economy, it has developed unique
economic institutions.

The Canadian economic system generally combines elements of private enterprise
and public enterprise. Many aspects of public enterprise, most notably the
development of an extensive welfare spending system to redress social and
economic inequities, were adopted after the end of World War II in 1945.

Approximately 89% of Canada's land is Crown land. Canada has one of the
highest levels of economic freedom in the world. Today Canada closely
resembles the U.S. in its market-oriented economic system and pattern of
production. As of 2019, Canada has 56 companies in the Forbes Global 2000
list, ranking ninth just behind South Korea and ahead of Saudi Arabia.
International trade makes up a large part of the Canadian economy,
particularly of its natural resources. In 2009, agriculture, energy, forestry
and mining exports accounted for about 58% of Canada's total exports.
Machinery, equipment, automotive products and other manufactures accounted for
a further 38% of exports in 2009. In 2009, exports accounted for about 30% of
Canada's GDP. The United States is by far its largest trading partner,
accounting for about 73% of exports and 63% of imports as of 2009. Canada's
combined exports and imports ranked 8th among all nations in 2006.

About 4% of Canadians are directly employed in primary resource fields, and
they account for 6.2% of GDP. They are still paramount in many parts of the
country. Many, if not most, towns in northern Canada, where agriculture is
difficult, exist because of a nearby mine or source of timber. Canada is a
world leader in the production of many natural resources such as gold, nickel,
uranium, diamonds, lead, and in recent years, crude petroleum, which, with the
world's second-largest oil reserves, is taking an increasingly prominent
position in natural resources extraction. Several of Canada's largest
companies are based in natural resource industries, such as Encana, Cameco,
Goldcorp, and Barrick Gold. The vast majority of these products are exported,
mainly to the United States. There are also many secondary and service
industries that are directly linked to primary ones. For instance one of
Canada's largest manufacturing industries is the pulp and paper sector, which
is directly linked to the logging business.

The reliance on natural resources has several effects on the Canadian economy
and Canadian society. While manufacturing and service industries are easy to
standardize, natural resources vary greatly by region. This ensures that
differing economic structures developed in each region of Canada, contributing
to Canada's strong regionalism. At the same time the vast majority of these
resources are exported, integrating Canada closely into the international
economy. Howlett and Ramesh argue that the inherent instability of such
industries also contributes to greater government intervention in the economy,
to reduce the social impact of market changes.

Natural resource industries also raise important questions of sustainability.
Despite many decades as a leading producer, there is little risk of depletion.
Large discoveries continue to be made, such as the massive nickel find at
Voisey's Bay. Moreover, the far north remains largely undeveloped as producers
await higher prices or new technologies as many operations in this region are
not yet cost effective. In recent decades Canadians have become less willing
to accept the environmental destruction associated with exploiting natural
resources. High wages and Aboriginal land claims have also curbed expansion.
Instead, many Canadian companies have focused their exploration, exploitation
and expansion activities overseas where prices are lower and governments more
amenable. Canadian companies are increasingly playing important roles in Latin
America, Southeast Asia, and Africa.

The depletion of renewable resources has raised concerns in recent years.
After decades of escalating overutilization the cod fishery all but collapsed
in the 1990s, and the Pacific salmon industry also suffered greatly. The
logging industry, after many years of activism, has in recent years moved to a
more sustainable model, or to other countries.

## Measuring productivity

Productivity measures are key indicators of economic performance and a key
source of economic growth and competitiveness. OECD's _Compendium of
Productivity Indicators_ , published annually, presents a broad overview of
productivity levels and growth in member nations, highlighting key measurement
issues. It analyses the role of "productivity as the main driver of economic
growth and convergence" and the "contributions of labour, capital and MFP in
driving economic growth". According to the definition above "MFP is often
interpreted as the contribution to economic growth made by factors such as
technical and organisational innovation". Measures of productivity include the
gross domestic product (GDP) and total factor productivity.

### Multifactor productivity

Another productivity measure, used by OECD, is the long-term trend in
multifactor productivity (MFP) also known as total factor productivity (TFP).
This indicator assesses an economy's "underlying productive capacity
('potential output'), itself an important measure of the growth possibilities
of economies and of inflationary pressures". MFP measures the residual growth
that cannot be explained by the rate of change in the services of labour,
capital and intermediate outputs, and is often interpreted as the contribution
to economic growth made by factors such as technical and organisational
innovation.

According to OECD's annual economic survey of Canada in June 2012, Canada has
experienced weak growth of multi-factor productivity (MFP) and has been
declining further since 2002. One of the ways MFP growth is raised is by
boosting innovation and Canada's innovation indicators such as business R&D
and patenting rates were poor. Raising MFP growth is "needed to sustain rising
living standards, especially as the population ages".

Since 2010, productivity growth has picked up, almost entirely driven by above
average multifactor productivity growth. However, productivity on the whole
still lags behind the upper half of OECD countries such as the United States.
Canada's productivity is now around the median OECD productivity, close to
that of Australia. More can be done to increase productivity, such as
increasing the productivity of capital through improving the capital stock to
output ratio and capital quality. This could be achieved through the
liberalization of internal trade barriers, as suggested in the OECD's latest
Canadian economic survey.

## Bank of Canada

The mandate of the central bank—the Bank of Canada is to conduct monetary
policy that "preserves the value of money by keeping inflation low and
stable".

### Monetary Policy Report

The Bank of Canada issues its bank rate announcement through its Monetary
Policy Report which is released eight times a year. The Bank of Canada, a
federal crown corporation, has the responsibility of Canada's monetary system.
Under the inflation-targeting monetary policy that has been the cornerstone of
Canada's monetary and fiscal policy since the early 1990s, the Bank of Canada
sets an inflation target The inflation target was set at 2 per cent, which is
the midpoint of an inflation range of 1 to 3 per cent. They established a set
of inflation-reduction targets to keep inflation "low, stable and predictable"
and to foster "confidence in the value of money", contribute to Canada's
sustained growth, employment gains and improved standard of living.

In a January 9, 2019 statement on the release of the Monetary Policy Report,
Bank of Canada Governor Stephen S. Poloz summarized major events since the
October report, such as "negative economic consequences" of the US-led trade
war with China. In response to the ongoing trade war "bond yields have fallen,
yield curves have flattened even more and stock markets have repriced
significantly" in "global financial markets". In Canada, low oil prices will
impact Canada's "macroeconomic outlook". Canada's housing sector is not
stabilizing as quickly as anticipated.

### Inflation targeting

During the period that John Crow was Governor of the Bank of Canada—1987 to
1994—there was a worldwide recession and the bank rate rose to around 14% and
unemployment topped 11%. Although since that time inflation-targeting has been
adopted by "most advanced-world central banks", in 1991 it was innovative and
Canada was an early adopter when the then-Finance Minister Michael Wilson
approved the Bank of Canada's first inflation-targeting in the 1991 federal
budget. The inflation target was set at 2 per cent. Inflation is measured by
the total consumer price index (CPI). In 2011 the Government of Canada and the
Bank of Canada extended Canada's inflation-control target to December 31,
2016. The Bank of Canada uses three unconventional instruments to achieve the
inflation target: "a conditional statement on the future path of the policy
rate", quantitative easing, and credit easing.

As a result, interest rates and inflation eventually came down along with the
value of the Canadian dollar. From 1991 to 2011 the inflation-targeting regime
kept "price gains fairly reliable".

Following the Great Recession, the narrow focus of inflation-targeting as a
means of providing stable growth in the Canadian economy was questioned. By
2011, the then-Bank of Canada Governor Mark Carney argued that the central
bank's mandate would allow for a more flexible inflation-targeting in specific
situations where he would consider taking longer "than the typical six to
eight quarters to return inflation to 2 per cent".

On July 15, 2015, the Bank of Canada announced that it was lowering its target
for the overnight rate by another one-quarter percentage point, to 0.5 per
cent "to try to stimulate an economy that appears to have failed to rebound
meaningfully from the oil shock woes that dragged it into decline in the first
quarter". According to the Bank of Canada announcement, in the first quarter
of 2015, the total Consumer price index (CPI) inflation was about 1 per cent.
This reflects "year-over-year price declines for consumer energy products".
Core inflation in the first quarter of 2015 was about 2 per cent with an
underlying trend in inflation at about 1.5 to 1.7 per cent.

In response to the Bank of Canada's July 15, 2015 rate adjustment, Prime
Minister Stephen Harper explained that the economy was "being dragged down by
forces beyond Canadian borders such as global oil prices, the European debt
crisis, and China's economic slowdown" which has made the global economy
"fragile".

The Chinese stock market had lost about US$3 trillion of wealth by July 2015
when panicked investors sold stocks, which created declines in the commodities
markets, which in turn negatively impacted resource-producing countries like
Canada.

The Bank's main priority has been to keep inflation at a moderate level. As
part of that strategy, interest rates were kept at a low level for almost
seven years. Since September 2010, the key interest rate (overnight rate) was
0.5%. In mid 2017, inflation remained below the Bank's 2% target, (at 1.6%)
mostly because of reductions in the cost of energy, food and automobiles; as
well, the economy was in a continuing spurt with a predicted GDP growth of 2.8
percent by year end. Early on July 12, 2017, the bank issued a statement that
the benchmark rate would be increased to 0.75%.

Following the COVID-19 pandemic, critics have pointed out that the Bank of
Canada's inflation-targeting has had unintended consequences, such as fuelling
an increase in home prices and contributing to wealth inequalities by
supporting higher equity values.

## Key industries

In 2020, the Canadian economy had the following relative weighting by the
industry as a percentage value of GDP:

Industry | Share of GDP   
---|---  
Real estate and rental and leasing | 13.01%   
Manufacturing | 10.37%   
Mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction | 8.21%   
Finance and insurance | 7.06%   
Construction | 7.08%   
Health care and social assistance | 6.63%   
Public administration | 6.28%   
Wholesale trade | 5.78%   
Retail trade | 5.60%   
Professional, scientific and technical services | 5.54%   
Educational services | 5.21%   
Transportation and warehousing | 4.60%   
Information and cultural industries | 3.00%   
Administrative and support, waste management, and remediation services | 2.46%   
Utilities | 2.21%   
Accommodation and food services | 2.15%   
Other services (except public administration) | 1.89%   
Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting | 1.53%   
Arts, entertainment and recreation | 0.77%   
Management of companies and enterprises | 0.62%   
  
### Real estate, rental, and leasing

Canada's real estate market is the backbone of the economy, comprising over
13% of the GDP by sector in 2020. In 2021, housing investment accounted for
21% of national wealth. It is difficult to discern the actual contribution of
other sectors (Construction, Investment and Financial Services, Manufacturing,
Forestry, etc.) to Real Estate, Rental and Leasing, as these industries are
intrinsically linked in a complex economy. The Bank of Canada has increased
its mortgage bond holdings to target 50% of the fixed-rate primary issuances.

### Service sector

The service sector in Canada is vast and multifaceted, employing about three
quarters of Canadians and accounting for 70% of GDP. The largest employer is
the retail sector, employing almost 12% of Canadians. The retail industry is
concentrated mainly in a small number of chain stores clustered together in
shopping malls. In recent years, there has been an increase in the number of
big-box stores, such as Walmart (of the United States), Real Canadian
Superstore, and Best Buy (of the United States). This has led to fewer workers
in this sector and the migration of retail jobs to the suburbs.

The Financial District in Downtown Vancouver. Canadian business services are
largely concentrated in large urban areas of Canada.

The second-largest portion of the service sector is the business service, and
it employs only a slightly smaller percentage of the population. This includes
the financial services, real estate, and communications industries. This
portion of the economy has been rapidly growing in recent years. It is largely
concentrated in the major urban centres, especially Toronto, Montreal and
Vancouver (see Banking in Canada).

The education and health sectors are two of Canada's largest, but both are
primarily under the influence of the government. The health care industry has
been quickly growing and is the third-largest in Canada.

Canada has an important high tech industry, and a burgeoning film, television,
and entertainment industry creating content for local and international
consumption (see Media in Canada). Tourism is of ever increasing importance,
with the vast majority of international visitors coming from the United
States. Casino gaming is currently the fastest-growing component of the
Canadian tourism industry, contributing $5 billion in profits for Canadian
governments and employing 41,000 Canadians as of 2001.

### Manufacturing

Ford's Oakville Assembly in the Greater Toronto Area. Central Canada is home
to several auto factories of the major American and Japanese automakers.

The general pattern of development for wealthy nations was a transition from a
raw material production-based economy to a manufacturing-based economy and
then to a service-based economy. At its World War II peak in 1944, Canada's
manufacturing sector accounted for 29% of GDP, declining to 10.37% in 2017.
Canada has not suffered as greatly as most other rich, industrialized nations
from the pains of the relative decline in the importance of manufacturing
since the 1960s. A 2009 study by Statistics Canada also found that, while
manufacturing declined as a relative percentage of GDP from 24.3% in the 1960s
to 15.6% in 2005, manufacturing volumes between 1961 and 2005 kept pace with
the overall growth in the volume index of GDP. Manufacturing in Canada
declined significantly during the Great Recession. As of 2017, manufacturing
accounts for 10% of Canada's GDP, a relative decline of more than 5% of GDP
since 2005.

Central Canada is home to branch plants to all the major American and Japanese
automobile makers and many parts factories owned by Canadian firms such as
Magna International and Linamar Corporation.

#### Steel

ArcelorMittal Dofasco, view from Burlington Street

Canada was the world's nineteenth-largest steel exporter in 2018. In year-to-
date 2019 (through March), further referred to as YTD 2019, Canada exported
1.39 million metric tons of steel, a 22 percent decrease from 1.79 million
metric tons in YTD 2018. Based on available data, Canada's exports represented
about 1.5 percent of all steel exported globally in 2017. By volume, Canada's
2018 steel exports represented just over one-tenth the volume of the world's
largest exporter, China. In value terms, steel represented 1.4 percent of the
total goods Canada exported in 2018. The growth in exports in the decade since
2009 has been 29%. The largest producers in 2018 were ArcelorMittal, Essar
Steel Algoma, and the first of those alone accounted for roughly half of
Canadian steel production through its two subsidiaries. The top two markets
for Canada's exports were its NAFTA partners, and by themselves accounted for
92 percent of exports by volume. Canada sent 83 percent of its steel exports
to the United States in YTD 2019. The gap between domestic demand and domestic
production increased to −2.4 million metric tons, up from −0.2 million metric
tons in YTD 2018. In YTD 2019, exports as a share of production decreased to
41.6 percent from 53 percent in YTD 2018.

In 2017, heavy industry accounted for 10.2% of Canada's greenhouse gas
emissions.

### Mining

Canada is one of the largest producers of metals (as of 2019):

Metal  | World rank  | Ref.  
---|---|---  
Platinum | 4  |   
Gold | 5  |   
Nickel | 5  |   
Copper | 10  |   
Iron (ore)  | 8  |   
Titanium | 4  |   
Potash | 1  |   
Niobium | 2  |   
Molybdenum | 7 |   
Cobalt | 7 |   
Lithium | 8 |   
Zinc | 8 |   
  
In 2019, the country was also the 4th largest world producer of sulfur; the
13th largest world producer of gypsum; the 14th worldwide producer of
antimony; the world's 10th largest producer of graphite; in addition to being
the 6th largest world producer of salt. It was the 2nd largest producer in the
world of uranium in 2018.

### Energy

Canada has access to cheap sources of energy because of its geography. This
has enabled the creation of several important industries, such as the large
aluminum industries in British Columbia and Quebec. Canada is also one of the
world's highest per capita consumers of energy.

#### Electricity

The electricity sector in Canada has played a significant role in the economic
and political life of the country since the late 19th century. The sector is
organized along provincial and territorial lines. In a majority of provinces,
large government-owned integrated public utilities play a leading role in the
generation, transmission and distribution of electricity. Ontario and Alberta
have created electricity markets in the last decade in order to increase
investment and competition in this sector of the economy. In 2017, the
electricity sector accounted for 10% of total national greenhouse gas
emissions. Canada has substantial electricity trade with the neighbouring
United States amounting to 72 TWh exports and 10 TWh imports in 2017.

Hydroelectricity accounted for 59% of all electric generation in Canada in
2016, making Canada the world's second-largest producer of hydroelectricity
after China. Since 1960, large hydroelectric projects, especially in Quebec,
British Columbia, Manitoba and Newfoundland and Labrador, have significantly
increased the country's generation capacity.

The second-largest single source of power (15% of the total) is nuclear power,
with several plants in Ontario generating more than half of that province's
electricity and one generator in New Brunswick. This makes Canada the world's
sixth-largest electricity producer generated by nuclear power, producing 95
TWh in 2017.

Fossil fuels provide 19% of Canadian electric power, about half as coal (9% of
the total), and the remainder a mix of natural gas and oil. Only five
provinces use coal for electricity generation. Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Nova
Scotia rely on coal for nearly half of their generation, while other provinces
and territories use little or none. Alberta and Saskatchewan also use a
substantial amount of natural gas. Remote communities, including all of
Nunavut and much of the Northwest Territories, produce most of their
electricity from diesel generators at high economic and environmental costs.
The federal government has set up initiatives to reduce dependence on diesel-
fired electricity.

Non-hydro renewables are a fast-growing portion of the total, at 7% in
2016.[_citation needed_]

#### Oil and gas

Syncrude's Mildred Lake plant site at the Athabasca oil sands in Alberta

Canada possesses extensive oil and gas resources centered in Alberta, and the
Northern Territories but is also present in neighboring British Columbia and
Saskatchewan. The vast Athabasca oil sands give Canada the world's third-
largest reserves of oil after Saudi Arabia and Venezuela, according to USGS.
The oil and gas industry represents 27% of Canada's total greenhouse gas
emissions, an increase of 84% since 1990, mostly due to the development of the
oil sands.

Historically, an important issue in Canadian politics is the interplay between
the oil and energy industry in Western Canada and the industrial heartland of
Southern Ontario. Foreign investment in Western oil projects has fueled
Canada's rising dollar. This has raised the price of Ontario's manufacturing
exports and made them less competitive, a problem similar to the decline of
the manufacturing sector in the Netherlands.

The National Energy Policy of the early 1980s attempted to make Canada oil-
sufficient and to ensure equal supply and price of oil in all parts of Canada,
especially for the eastern manufacturing base. This policy proved deeply
divisive as it forced Alberta to sell low-priced oil to eastern Canada. The
policy was eliminated 5 years after it was first announced amid a collapse of
oil prices in 1985. The new Prime Minister Brian Mulroney had campaigned
against the policy in the 1984 Canadian federal election. One of the most
controversial sections of the Canada–United States Free Trade Agreement of
1988 was a promise that Canada would never charge the United States more for
energy than fellow Canadians.

### Agriculture

An inland grain terminal along the Yellowhead Highway in Saskatchewan

Canada is one of the world's largest suppliers of agricultural products,
particularly wheat and other grains. Canada is a major exporter of
agricultural products, to the United States and Asia. As with all other
developed nations, the proportion of the population and GDP devoted to
agriculture fell dramatically over the 20th century. The agriculture and agri-
food manufacturing sector created $49.0 billion to Canada's GDP in 2015,
accounting for 2.6% of total GDP. This sector also accounts for 8.4% of
Canada's Greenhouse gas emissions.

The Canadian agriculture industry receives significant government subsidies
and support as with other developed nations. However, Canada has strongly
supported reducing market influencing subsidies through the World Trade
Organization.[_citation needed_] In 2000, Canada spent approximately CDN$4.6
billion on support for the industry.[_citation needed_] $2.32 billion was
classified under the WTO designation of "green box" license, meaning it did
not directly influence the market, such as money for research or disaster
relief.[_citation needed_] All but $848.2 million were subsidies worth less
than 5% of the value of the crops they were provided for.[_citation needed_]

## Free-trade agreements

Canada

Free-trade areas

### Free-trade agreements in force

    Source:

  * Canada–Israel Free Trade Agreement (Entered into force January 1, 1997, modernization ongoing)
  * Canada–Chile Free Trade Agreement (Entered into force July 5, 1997)
  * Canada–Costa Rica Free Trade Agreement (Entered into force November 1, 2002, modernization ongoing)
  * Canada–European Free Trade Association Free Trade Agreement (Iceland, Norway, Switzerland and Liechtenstein; entered into force July 1, 2009)
  * Canada–Peru Free Trade Agreement (Entered into force August 1, 2009)
  * Canada–Colombia Free Trade Agreement (Signed November 21, 2008, entered into force August 15, 2011; Canada's ratification of this FTA had been dependent upon Colombia's ratification of the "Agreement Concerning Annual Reports on Human Rights and Free Trade Between Canada and the Republic of Colombia" signed on May 27, 2010)
  * Canada–Jordan Free Trade Agreement (Signed on June 28, 2009, entered into force October 1, 2012)
  * Canada–Panama Free Trade Agreement (Signed on May 14, 2010, entered into force April 1, 2013)
  * Canada–South Korea Free Trade Agreement (Signed on March 11, 2014, entered into force January 1, 2015)
  * Canada–Ukraine Free Trade Agreement (Signed 11 July 2016, entered into force August 1, 2017)
  * Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement with the European Union (EU) (signed 30 October 2016, entered into force 21 September 2017)
  * Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (signed March 8, 2018, entered into force December 30, 2018)
  * Canada–United States–Mexico Agreement (signed November 30, 2018, entered into force July 1, 2020)
  * Canada–UK Trade Continuity Agreement (signed 9 December 2020, entered into force 1 April 2021)

### Free-trade agreements no longer in force

    Source:

  * Canada–U.S. Free Trade Agreement (signed October 12, 1987, entered into force January 1, 1989, later superseded by NAFTA)
  * Trans-Pacific Partnership (concluded October 5, 2015, superseded by CPTPP)
  * North American Free Trade Agreement (entered into force January 1, 1994, later superseded by USMCA)

### Ongoing free-trade agreements negotiations

    Source:

Canada is negotiating bilateral FTAs with the following countries respectively
trade blocs:

  * Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
  * Guatemala, Nicaragua and El Salvador
  * Dominican Republic
  * India
  * Japan
  * Morocco
  * Singapore
  * Andean Community (FTA's are already in force with Peru and Colombia)

Canada has been involved in negotiations to create the following regional
trade blocks:

  * Canada and Central American Free Trade Agreement
  * Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA)

## Political issues

### Canada–United States trade relations

Canada and the United States share a common trading relationship. Canada's job
market continues to perform well along with the US, reaching a 30-year low in
the unemployment rate in December 2006, following 14 consecutive years of
employment growth.

Flags of Canada and the United States

The United States is by far Canada's largest trading partner, with more than
$1.7 billion CAD in trade per day in 2005. In 2009, 73% of Canada's exports
went to the United States, and 63% of Canada's imports were from the United
States. Trade with Canada makes up 23% of the United States' exports and 17%
of its imports. By comparison, in 2005 this was more than U.S. trade with all
countries in the European Union combined, and well over twice U.S. trade with
all the countries of Latin America combined. Just the two-way trade that
crosses the Ambassador Bridge between Michigan and Ontario equals all U.S.
exports to Japan. Canada's importance to the United States is not just a
border-state phenomenon: Canada is the leading export market for 35 of 50 U.S.
states, and is the United States' largest foreign supplier of energy.

Bilateral trade increased by 52% between 1989, when the U.S.–Canada Free Trade
Agreement (FTA) went into effect, and 1994, when the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) superseded it. Trade has since increased by 40%. NAFTA
continues the FTA's moves toward reducing trade barriers and establishing
agreed-upon trade rules. It also resolves some long-standing bilateral
irritants and liberalizes rules in several areas, including agriculture,
services, energy, financial services, investment, and government procurement.
NAFTA forms the largest trading area in the world, embracing the 405 million
people of the three North American countries.

The largest component of U.S.–Canada trade is in the commodity sector.

The U.S. is Canada's largest agricultural export market, taking well over half
of all Canadian food exports. Nearly two-thirds of Canada's forest products,
including pulp and paper, are exported to the United States; 72% of Canada's
total newsprint production also is exported to the U.S.

At $73.6 billion in 2004, U.S.-Canada trade in energy is the largest U.S.
energy trading relationship, with the overwhelming majority ($66.7 billion)
being exports from Canada. The primary components of U.S. energy trade with
Canada are petroleum, natural gas, and electricity. Canada is the United
States' largest oil supplier and the fifth-largest energy producing country in
the world. Canada provides about 16% of U.S. oil imports and 14% of total U.S.
consumption of natural gas. The United States and Canada's national
electricity grids are linked, and both countries share hydropower facilities
on the western borders.

While most of U.S.-Canada trade flows smoothly, there are occasionally
bilateral trade disputes, particularly in the agricultural and cultural
fields.[_citation needed_] Usually these issues are resolved through bilateral
consultative forums or referral to World Trade Organization (WTO) or NAFTA
dispute resolution.[_citation needed_] In May 1999, the U.S. and Canadian
governments negotiated an agreement on magazines that provides increased
access for the U.S. publishing industry to the Canadian market. The United
States and Canada also have resolved several major issues involving fisheries.
By common agreement, the two countries submitted a Gulf of Maine boundary
dispute to the International Court of Justice in 1981; both accepted the
court's October 12, 1984 ruling which demarcated the territorial sea boundary.
A current issue between the United States and Canada is the ongoing softwood
lumber dispute, as the U.S. alleges that Canada unfairly subsidizes its
forestry industry.[_citation needed_]

In 1990, the United States and Canada signed a bilateral Fisheries Enforcement
Agreement, which has served to deter illegal fishing activity and reduce the
risk of injury during fisheries enforcement incidents. The U.S. and Canada
signed a Pacific Salmon Agreement in June 1999 that settled differences over
implementation of the 1985 Pacific Salmon Treaty for the next decade.

Canada and the United States signed an aviation agreement during Bill
Clinton's visit to Canada in February 1995, and air traffic between the two
countries has increased dramatically as a result. The two countries also share
in operation of the St. Lawrence Seaway, connecting the Great Lakes to the
Atlantic Ocean.

The U.S. remains Canada's largest foreign investor and the most popular
destination for Canadian foreign investments. In 2018, the stock of U.S.
direct investment in Canada totaled $406 billion, while the stock of Canadian
investment in the U.S. totaled $595 billion, or 46% of the overall CDIA stock
for 2018. This made Canada the second largest investing country in the U.S.
for 2018 US investments are primarily directed at Canada's mining and smelting
industries, petroleum, chemicals, the manufacture of machinery and
transportation equipment, and finance, while Canadian investment in the United
States is concentrated in manufacturing, wholesale trade, real estate,
petroleum, finance, insurance and other services.

## Debt

Canada bonds

Inverted yield curve in 2006–2007 and 2019

30 year

10 year

2 year

1 year

3 month

1 month

### Canadian government debt

Canadian government debt, also called Canada's public debt, is the liabilities
of the government sector. For 2019 (the fiscal year ending 31 March 2020),
total financial liabilities or gross debt was $2.434 trillion for the
consolidated Canadian general government (federal, provincial, territorial,
and local governments combined). This corresponds to 105.3% as a ratio of GDP
(GDP was $2.311 trillion). Of the $2.434 trillion, $1.146 trillion or 47% was
federal (central) government liabilities (49.6% as a ratio of GDP). Provincial
government liabilities comprise most of the remaining liabilities.

### Household debt

Household debt, the amount of money that all adults in the household owe
financial institutions, includes consumer debt and mortgage loans. In March
2015, the International Monetary Fund reported that Canada's high household
debt was one of two vulnerable domestic areas in Canada's economy; the second
is its overheated housing market.

According to Statistics Canada, total household credit as of July 2019 was
CAD$2.2 trillion. According to Philip Cross of the Fraser Institute, in May
2015, while the Canadian household debt-to-income ratio is similar to that in
the US, however lending standards in Canada are tighter than those in the
United States to protect against high-risk borrowers taking out unsustainable
debt.

## Mergers and acquisitions

Since 1985, 63,755 deals in- and outbound Canada have been announced,[_when?_]
with an overall value of US$3.7 billion. Almost 50% of the targets of Canadian
companies (outbound deals) have a parent company in the US. Inbound deals are
82% percent from the US.

Here is a list of the biggest deals in Canadian history:

Rank  | Date announced  | Acquiror name  | Acquiror nation  | Target name  | Target nation  | Value (in bil. USD)   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1  | January 26, 2000  | Spin-off  | Canada  | Nortel Networks Corp  | Canada  | 59.97   
2  | June 20, 2000  | Vivendi SA  | France  | Seagram Co Ltd  | Canada  | 40.43   
3  | December 7, 2007  | Rio Tinto Canada Holdings Inc  | Canada  | Alcan Inc  | Canada  | 37.63   
4  | June 9, 2016  | Enbridge Inc  | Canada  | Spectra Energy Corp  | United States  | 28.29   
5  | March 12, 2014  | Enbridge Income Fund  | Canada  | Enbridge Inc-Liquids  | Canada  | 24.79   
6  | November 5, 2008  | Shareholders  | Canada  | Cenovus Energy Inc  | Canada  | 20.26   
7  | July 23, 2012  | CNOOC Canada Holding Ltd  | Canada  | Nexen Inc  | Canada  | 19.12   
8  | May 15, 2006  | Xstrata PLC  | Switzerland  | Falconbridge Ltd  | Canada  | 17.40   
9  | November 8, 2006  | Cia Vale do Rio Doce SA  | Brazil  | Inco Ltd  | Canada  | 17.15   
10  | March 23, 2009  | Suncor Energy Inc  | Canada  | Petro-Canada  | Canada  | 15.58   
11  | July 29, 2008  | Teck Cominco Ltd  | Canada  | Fording Canadian Coal Trust  | Canada  | 13.60   
  
## Raw data

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF
staff estimates for 2022–2027). Inflation below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$nominal) | GDP per capita (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 288.7  | 11,798.2  | 276.1  | 11,281.4  | 2.2%  | 10.2%  | 7.5%  | 44.6%   
1981  | 327.1  | 13,197.5  | 307.2  | 12,396.7  | 3.5%  | 12.5%  | 7.6%  | 46.1%   
1982  | 336.2  | 13,404.9  | 314.6  | 12,543.9  | -3.2%  | 10.8%  | 11.1%  | 51.7%   
1983  | 358.5  | 14,149.5  | 341.9  | 13,493.2  | 2.6%  | 5.8%  | 12.0%  | 57.2%   
1984  | 393.4  | 15,380.2  | 356.7  | 13,947.4  | 5.9%  | 4.3%  | 11.4%  | 60.2%   
1985  | 425.0  | 16,466.0  | 366.2  | 14,185.9  | 4.7%  | 4.0%  | 10.5%  | 65.2%   
1986  | 442.9  | 16,990.4  | 379.0  | 14,539.8  | 2.1%  | 4.2%  | 9.6%  | 69.3%   
1987  | 472.3  | 17,893.0  | 433.1  | 16,408.1  | 4.1%  | 4.4%  | 8.8%  | 69.8%   
1988  | 510.6  | 19,085.3  | 509.4  | 19,041.2  | 4.4%  | 4.0%  | 7.8%  | 69.7%   
1989  | 542.9  | 19,947.7  | 567.2  | 20,842.5  | 2.3%  | 5.0%  | 7.5%  | 71.0%   
1990  | 564.1  | 20,415.1  | 596.1  | 21,572.1  | 0.2%  | 4.8%  | 8.2%  | 73.7%   
1991  | 571.0  | 20,403.3  | 612.5  | 21,885.6  | -2.1%  | 5.6%  | 10.3%  | 81.7%   
1992  | 589.3  | 20,805.6  | 594.4  | 20,984.8  | 0.9%  | 1.5%  | 11.2%  | 88.2%   
1993  | 619.3  | 21,615.6  | 579.1  | 20,210.5  | 2.7%  | 1.9%  | 11.4%  | 94.7%   
1994  | 661.0  | 22,823.8  | 579.9  | 20,024.6  | 4.5%  | 0.2%  | 10.4%  | 97.5%   
1995  | 693.0  | 23,682.4  | 605.9  | 20,706.7  | 2.7%  | 2.1%  | 9.5%  | 100.1%   
1996  | 717.1  | 24,252.2  | 630.6  | 21,325.7  | 1.6%  | 1.6%  | 9.6%  | 100.2%   
1997  | 760.7  | 25,469.8  | 655.0  | 21,930.5  | 4.3%  | 1.6%  | 9.1%  | 95.3%   
1998  | 799.3  | 26,532.4  | 634.0  | 21,046.6  | 3.9%  | 1.0%  | 8.3%  | 93.3%   
1999  | 852.4  | 28,068.8  | 678.4  | 22,340.6  | 5.2%  | 1.7%  | 7.6%  | 89.0%   
2000  | 916.8  | 29,914.7  | 744.6  | 24,296.7  | 5.2%  | 2.7%  | 6.8%  | 80.4%   
2001  | 954.2  | 30,810.5  | 739.0  | 23,859.7  | 1.8%  | 2.5%  | 7.2%  | 81.5%   
2002  | 998.4  | 31,887.8  | 760.1  | 24,279.2  | 3.0%  | 2.3%  | 7.7%  | 79.6%   
2003  | 1,036.4  | 32,794.3  | 895.6  | 28,338.7  | 1.8%  | 2.8%  | 7.6%  | 75.9%   
2004  | 1,097.1  | 34,390.0  | 1,026.5  | 32,176.6  | 3.1%  | 1.9%  | 7.2%  | 71.9%   
2005  | 1,167.7  | 36,260.7  | 1,173.5  | 36,439.6  | 3.2%  | 2.2%  | 6.8%  | 70.6%   
2006  | 1,235.5  | 37,980.7  | 1,319.4  | 40,558.9  | 2.6%  | 2.0%  | 6.3%  | 69.9%   
2007  | 1,295.2  | 39,428.2  | 1,468.9  | 44,717.0  | 2.1%  | 2.1%  | 6.1%  | 66.9%   
2008  | 1,333.3  | 40,159.1  | 1,552.9  | 46,773.8  | 1.0%  | 2.4%  | 6.2%  | 67.9%   
2009  | 1,302.5  | 38,788.0  | 1,376.5  | 40,990.6  | -2.9%  | 0.3%  | 8.4%  | 79.3%   
2010  | 1,358.9  | 40,017.6  | 1,617.3  | 47,627.3  | 3.1%  | 1.8%  | 8.1%  | 81.2%   
2011  | 1,430.8  | 41,716.4  | 1,793.3  | 52,285.9  | 3.1%  | 2.9%  | 7.6%  | 81.8%   
2012  | 1,468.1  | 42,351.1  | 1,828.4  | 52,744.0  | 1.8%  | 1.5%  | 7.4%  | 85.4%   
2013  | 1,554.1  | 44,360.4  | 1,846.6  | 52,708.6  | 2.3%  | 0.9%  | 7.1%  | 86.1%   
2014  | 1,621.4  | 45,812.0  | 1,805.8  | 51,020.8  | 2.9%  | 1.9%  | 7.0%  | 85.6%   
2015  | 1,594.9  | 44,702.5  | 1,556.5  | 43,626.5  | 0.7%  | 1.1%  | 6.9%  | 91.2%   
2016  | 1,678.4  | 46,554.1  | 1,528.0  | 42,382.6  | 1.0%  | 1.4%  | 7.1%  | 91.8%   
2017  | 1,776.9  | 48,688.1  | 1,649.3  | 45,192.0  | 3.0%  | 1.6%  | 6.4%  | 88.9%   
2018  | 1,869.8  | 50,531.6  | 1,725.3  | 46,625.9  | 2.8%  | 2.3%  | 5.9%  | 88.9%   
2019  | 1,939.0  | 51,652.6  | 1,742.0  | 46,404.0  | 1.9%  | 1.9%  | 5.8%  | 87.2%   
2020  | 1,859.7  | 48,946.8  | 1,645.4  | 43,306.6  | -5.2%  | 0.7%  | 9.6%  | 117.8%   
2021  | 2,025.0  | 52,973.0  | 1,988.3  | 52,015.1  | 4.5%  | 3.4%  | 7.4%  | 112.9%   
2022  | 2,240.4  | 57,827.5  | 2,200.4  | 56,794.0  | 3.3%  | 6.9%  | 5.3%  | 102.2%   
2023  | 2,353.9  | 59,872.2  | 2,326.6  | 59,179.0  | 1.5%  | 4.2%  | 5.9%  | 98.7%   
2024  | 2,441.8  | 61,274.7  | 2,420.7  | 60,745.3  | 1.6%  | 2.4%  | 6.2%  | 96.3%   
2025  | 2,544.9  | 63,042.6  | 2,531.2  | 62,703.5  | 2.3%  | 1.9%  | 6.1%  | 93.3%   
2026  | 2,642.5  | 64,649.4  | 2,630.3  | 64,352.5  | 1.9%  | 1.9%  | 6.0%  | 90.9%   
2027  | 2,739.4  | 66,221.6  | 2,728.4  | 65,954.5  | 1.7%  | 2.0%  | 6.0%  | 88.7%   
  
### Unemployment & Participation rate

Province  | Unemployment rate  
percentage of labour force  
as of April 2025  | Participation Rate  | Employment   
---|---|---|---  
Alberta | 7.1%  | 68.5%  | 2,565,800   
British Columbia | 6.2%  | 65.1%  | 2,950,900   
Manitoba | 5.3%  | 66.4%  | 736,000   
Newfoundland and Labrador | 9.6%  | 58.3%  | 248,100   
New Brunswick | 6.9%  | 59.8%  | 400,400   
Nova Scotia | 7.2%  | 61.0%  | 516,400   
Ontario | 7.8%  | 65.0%  | 8,195,200   
Prince Edward Island | 6.6%  | 65.9%  | 94,300   
Quebec | 6.0%  | 65.3%  | 4,645,600   
Saskatchewan | 4.3%  | 66.8%  | 616,000   
**Canada (national)** | 6.9%  | 65.3%  | **20,969,300**  
  
### Export trade

Export trade from Canada measured in US dollars. In 2021, Canada exported
US$503.4 billion.

That dollar amount reflects a 19.5% gain since 2017 and a 29.1% increase from
2020 to 2021.

Partner  | Value  | Fraction   
---|---|---  
United States | $380.4 billion  | 75.6%   
China | $23 billion  | 4.6%   
United Kingdom | $12.9 billion  | 2.6%   
Japan | $11.5 billion  | 2.3%   
Mexico | $6.5 billion  | 1.3%   
Germany | $5.5 billion  | 1.1%   
South Korea | $4.5 billion  | 0.9%   
Netherlands | $3.8 billion  | 0.8%   
France | $3.2 billion  | 0.6%   
Belgium | $3.0 billion  | 0.6%   
Hong Kong | $2.8 billion  | 0.6%   
Norway | $2.5 billion  | 0.5%   
Switzerland | $1.6 billion  | 0.5%   
India | $2.35 billion  | 0.5%   
Italy | $2.1 billion  | 0.4%   
  
### Import trade

Import trade in 2017 measured in US dollars.

Partner  | Value  | Fraction   
---|---|---  
United States | $222.0 billion  | 51.3%   
China | $54.7 billion  | 12.7%   
Mexico | $27.4 billion  | 6.3%   
Germany | $13.8 billion  | 3.2%   
Japan | $13.5 billion  | 3.1%   
United Kingdom | $6.9 billion  | 1.6%   
South Korea | $6.7 billion  | 1.5%   
Italy | $6.3 billion  | 1.5%   
France | $4.8 billion  | 1.1%   
Vietnam | $3.9 billion  | 0.9%