The **economy of Nicaragua** is focused primarily on the agricultural sector.
Nicaragua itself is the least developed country in Central America, and the
second least developed in the Americas by nominal GDP, behind only Haiti. In
recent years, under the administrations of Daniel Ortega, the Nicaraguan
economy has expanded somewhat, following the Great Recession, when the
country's economy actually contracted by 1.5%, due to decreased export demand
in the American and Central American markets, lower commodity prices for key
agricultural exports, and low remittance growth. The economy saw 4.5% growth
in 2010 thanks to a recovery in export demand and growth in its tourism
industry. Nicaragua's economy continues to post growth, with preliminary
indicators showing the Nicaraguan economy growing an additional 5% in 2011.
Consumer Price inflation have also curtailed since 2008, when Nicaragua's
inflation rate hovered at 19.82%. In 2009 and 2010, the country posted lower
inflation rates, 3.68% and 5.45%, respectively. Remittances are a major source
of income, equivalent to 15% of the country's GDP, which originate primarily
from Costa Rica, the United States, and European Union member states.
Approximately one million Nicaraguans contribute to the remittance sector of
the economy.

In early 2004, Nicaragua secured some $4.5 billion in foreign debt reduction
under the International Monetary Fund and World Bank Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries initiative. In April 2006, the US-Central America Free Trade
Agreement went into effect, expanding export opportunities for Nicaragua's
agricultural and manufactured goods. Textiles and apparel account for nearly
60% of Nicaragua's exports. In October 2007, the IMF approved an additional
poverty reduction and growth facility program in support of the government's
economic plans. Nicaragua relies on international economic assistance to meet
internal- and external-debt financing obligations, although foreign donors
curtailed this funding in response to widespread allegations of electoral
fraud in Nicaragua's November 2008 elections.

## Economic history

Nicaragua inflation rate 1980-1993

Nicaragua's economy was devastated in the 1980s by the Contra War, which saw
the destruction of much of the country's infrastructure. At the same time, the
US staged an economic blockade from 1985 onward.

Following the civil war, Nicaragua began free market reforms, privatizing more
than 350 state companies and commencing a general trend of economic growth.
Inflation has been reduced from 33,603% during the later years of the
Sandinista period and 55,000% during the first year of the Chamorro government
to more normal levels, averaging an annual rate of 9.5% over the 2000-2010
decade (based on World Bank figures).

Growth was slow (3%) in 2001 due to a combination of factors (a global
recession, a series of bank failures, low coffee prices, and a drought), and
in 2009 the economy actually contracted 1.5% due to the Great Recession). But
even with the recessions, growth has averaged 3.4% between 2001 and 2011
(based on World Bank figures).

## Economy

Unemployment was 7.2% in 2023. Nicaragua suffers from persistent trade and
budget deficits and a high debt-service burden, leaving it highly dependent on
foreign assistanceâ€”which represented almost 25% of GDP in 2001.

One of the key engines of economic growth has been production for export.
Although traditional products such as coffee, meat, and sugar continued to
lead the list of Nicaraguan exports, the fastest growth is now in
nontraditional exports: textile and apparel; gold; seafood; and new
agricultural products such as peanuts, sesame, melons, and onions. In 2007,
exports topped US$1 billion for the first time in Nicaraguan history.

Nicaragua is primarily an agricultural country, but construction, mining,
fisheries, and general commerce also have been expanding during the last few
years. Foreign private capital inflows topped $300 million in 1999 but, due to
economic and political uncertainty, fell to less than $100 million in 2001. In
the last 12 years, tourism has grown 394%, the rapid growth has led it to
become Nicaragua's second largest source of foreign capital. Less than three
years ago, the nation's tourism budget was U.S. $400,000; today, it is over $2
million. Nicaragua's economy has also produced a construction boom, the
majority of which is in and around Managua.

Nicaragua faces a number of challenges in stimulating rapid economic growth.
An International Monetary Fund (IMF) program is currently being followed, with
the aim of attracting investment, creating jobs, and reducing poverty by
opening the economy to foreign trade. This process was boosted in late 2000
when Nicaragua reached the decision point under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) debt relief initiative. However, HIPC benefits were delayed
because Nicaragua subsequently fell "off track" from its IMF program. The
country also has been grappling with a string of bank failures that began in
August 2000. Moreover, Nicaragua continues to lose international reserves due
to its growing fiscal deficits.

The country is still a recovering economy and it continues to implement
further reforms, on which aid from the IMF is conditional. In 2005, finance
ministers of the leading eight industrialized nations (G8) agreed to forgive
some of Nicaragua's foreign debt, as part of the HIPC program. According to
the World Bank Nicaragua's GDP was around $4.9 US billion dollars. Recently,
in March 2007, Poland and Nicaragua signed an agreement to write off $30.6
million which was borrowed by the Nicaraguan government in the 1980s.

The U.S. is the country's largest trading partner, providing 25% of
Nicaragua's imports and receiving about 60% of its exports. About 25 wholly or
partly owned subsidiaries of U.S. companies operate in Nicaragua. The largest
of those operations are in the energy, communications, manufacturing,
fisheries, and shrimp farming sectors. Opportunities exist for expanded
foreign investments in those sectors, as well as in tourism, mining,
franchising, and the distribution of imported consumer, manufacturing, and
agricultural goods. There also are copper mines in northeastern Nicaragua.

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2012 was
estimated at US$20.04 billion, and GDP per capita in PPP at US$3,300, making
Nicaragua the second poorest country in the Western Hemisphere. The service
sector is the largest component of GDP at 56.7%, followed by the industrial
sector at 25.8%(2012). Agriculture represents 17.5% of GDP and it's the
largest percentage in a Central American country. Nicaraguan labor force is
estimated at 2.961 million of which 28% is occupied in agriculture, 19% in the
industry sector and 53% in the service sector (2012).

### Agriculture and food production

Coffee became Nicaragua's principal crop in the 1870s, a position it still
held in 1992 despite the growing importance of other crops. Cotton gained
importance in the late 1940s, and in 1992 was the second biggest export
earner. In the early 20th century, Nicaraguan governments were reluctant to
give concessions to the large United States banana companies, and bananas
never attained the level of prominence in Nicaragua that they reached in
Nicaragua's Central American neighbors; bananas were grown in the country,
however, and were generally the third largest export earner in the post-World
War II period. Beef and animal byproducts, the most important agricultural
export for the three centuries before the coffee boom of the late 19th
century, were still important commodities in 1992.

From the end of World War II to the early 1960s, the growth and
diversification of the agricultural sector drove the nation's economic
expansion. From the early 1960s until the increased fighting in 1977 caused by
the Sandinista revolution, agriculture remained a robust and significant part
of the economy, although its growth slowed somewhat in comparison with the
previous postwar decades. Statistics for the next fifteen years, however, show
stagnation and then a drop in agricultural production.

The agricultural sector declined precipitously in the 1980s. Until the late
1970s, Nicaragua's agricultural export system generated 40 percent of the
country's GDP, 60 percent of national employment, and 80 percent of foreign
exchange earnings. Throughout the 1980s, the Contras destroyed or disrupted
coffee harvests as well as other key income-generating crops. Private industry
stopped investing in agriculture because of uncertain returns. Land was taken
out of production of export crops to expand plantings of basic grain. Many
coffee plants succumbed to disease.

In 1989, the fifth successive year of decline, farm production declined by
roughly 7 percent in comparison with the previous year. Production of basic
grains fell as a result of Hurricane Joan in 1988 and a drought in 1989. By
1990 agricultural exports had declined to less than half the level of 1978.
The only bright spot was the production of nontraditional export crops such as
sesame, tobacco, and African palm oil.

### Services

The service sector was estimated to account for 56.8% of the country's GDP,
and employs 52% of the active population. This section includes
transportation, commerce, warehousing, restaurant and hotels, arts and
entertainment, health, education, financial and banking services,
telecommunications as well as public administration and defense.

Tourism in Nicaragua is one of the most important industries in the country.
It is the second largest source of foreign exchange for the country and is
predicted to become the first largest industry in 2007. The growth in tourism
has positively affected the agricultural, commercial, finance, and
construction industries as well.

## Current economic outlook

Nicaragua has ratified Free Trade Agreements with major markets such as the
United States, the Dominican Republic (DR-CAFTA), Taiwan and Mexico, among
others. As evidence of continuous efforts in improving the business climate,
Nicaragua has been ranked favorably in a variety of independent evaluations.

The 2011 Doing Business Report, published by The World Bank Group, a report
that benchmarks various indicators of the investment climate in 183 nations,
ranked Nicaragua as the top location in Central America in starting a
business, investor protection, and closing a business. Additionally, the
country improved in the following categories: ease of doing business,
registering property, paying taxes, trading across borders, and enforcing
contracts.

### Data

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980â€“2020 (with IMF
staff stimtates in 2021â€“2026). Inflation below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$nominal) | GDP per capita (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 6.2  | n/a  | 1.8  | n/a  | 4.6%  | 35.1%  | 13.4%  | n/a   
1981  | 7.1  | n/a  | 2.2  | n/a  | 5.4%  | 23.8%  | 11.8%  | n/a   
1982  | 7.5  | n/a  | 2.5  | n/a  | -0.8%  | 28.5%  | 12.4%  | n/a   
1983  | 8.2  | n/a  | 2.9  | n/a  | 4.6%  | 33.6%  | 11.0%  | n/a   
1984  | 8.3  | n/a  | 4.0  | n/a  | -1.6%  | 141.3%  | 12.0%  | n/a   
1985  | 8.2  | n/a  | 3.9  | n/a  | -4.1%  | 571.4%  | 12.5%  | n/a   
1986  | 8.3  | n/a  | 5.8  | n/a  | -1.0%  | 885.2%  | 13.1%  | n/a   
1987  | 8.5  | n/a  | 3.4  | n/a  | -0.7%  | 13,109.5%  | 14.0%  | n/a   
1988  | 7.7  | n/a  | 1.5  | n/a  | -12.4%  | 4,775.2%  | 14.2%  | n/a   
1989  | 7.8  | n/a  | 2.1  | n/a  | -1.7%  | 7,428.7%  | 15.0%  | n/a   
1990  | 8.1  | n/a  | 0.5  | n/a  | -0.1%  | 3,004.1%  | 15.5%  | n/a   
1991  | 8.4  | n/a  | 3.7  | n/a  | -0.2%  | 116.6%  | 14.9%  | n/a   
1992  | 8.6  | n/a  | 3.9  | n/a  | 0.4%  | 21.9%  | 14.4%  | n/a   
1993  | 8.8  | n/a  | 3.7  | n/a  | -0.4%  | 13.5%  | 15.0%  | n/a   
1994  | 9.4  | 2,191.5  | 3.9  | 898.2  | 5.0%  | 3.7%  | 17.1%  | n/a   
1995  | 10.2  | 2,301.4  | 4.1  | 935.3  | 5.9%  | 11.1%  | 16.9%  | n/a   
1996  | 11.0  | 2,425.3  | 4.3  | 947.1  | 6.3%  | 11.7%  | 16.0%  | n/a   
1997  | 11.7  | 2,498.7  | 4.4  | 940.1  | 4.0%  | 9.2%  | 14.3%  | 86.4%   
1998  | 12.2  | 2,568.9  | 4.6  | 973.1  | 3.7%  | 13.0%  | 13.2%  | 86.5%   
1999  | 13.3  | 2,733.8  | 4.9  | 999.4  | 7.0%  | 11.2%  | 10.7%  | 99.8%   
2000  | 14.1  | 2,852.6  | 5.1  | 1,030.7  | 4.1%  | 11.5%  | 9.8%  | 95.2%   
2001  | 14.9  | 2,942.9  | 5.3  | 1,054.7  | 3.0%  | 7.4%  | 6.4%  | 87.5%   
2002  | 15.2  | 2,950.8  | 5.2  | 1,011.9  | 0.8%  | 3.8%  | 12.2%  | 110.4%   
2003  | 15.9  | 3,023.2  | 5.3  | 1,010.2  | 2.5%  | 5.3%  | 7.0%  | 109.5%   
2004  | 17.2  | 3,204.1  | 5.8  | 1,077.8  | 5.3%  | 8.5%  | 6.5%  | 84.0%   
2005  | 18.5  | 3,377.8  | 6.3  | 1,152.8  | 4.3%  | 9.6%  | 5.6%  | 66.6%   
2006  | 19.8  | 3,588.9  | 6.8  | 1,224.7  | 3.8%  | 9.1%  | 5.2%  | 51.2%   
2007  | 21.4  | 3,822.5  | 7.4  | 1,326.7  | 5.1%  | 11.1%  | 5.9%  | 30.9%   
2008  | 22.5  | 3,977.5  | 8.5  | 1,498.9  | 3.4%  | 19.8%  | 6.1%  | 26.0%   
2009  | 21.9  | 3,821.7  | 8.3  | 1,444.9  | -3.3%  | 3.7%  | 8.2%  | 29.3%   
2010  | 23.2  | 3,987.4  | 8.8  | 1,506.1  | 4.4%  | 5.5%  | 7.8%  | 30.3%   
2011  | 25.2  | 4,196.7  | 9.8  | 1,630.0  | 6.3%  | 8.1%  | 5.9%  | 28.8%   
2012  | 26.5  | 4,363.4  | 10.5  | 1,734.8  | 6.5%  | 7.2%  | 5.9%  | 27.9%   
2013  | 28.0  | 4,556.3  | 11.0  | 1,790.4  | 4.9%  | 7.1%  | 5.7%  | 28.8%   
2014  | 30.4  | 4,897.5  | 11.9  | 1,916.8  | 4.8%  | 6.0%  | 6.6%  | 28.7%   
2015  | 32.9  | 5,260.5  | 12.8  | 2,036.9  | 4.8%  | 4.0%  | 5.9%  | 28.9%   
2016  | 35.9  | 5,672.5  | 13.3  | 2,099.6  | 4.6%  | 3.5%  | 4.5%  | 30.9%   
2017  | 38.3  | 5,995.6  | 13.8  | 2,156.1  | 4.6%  | 3.9%  | 3.7%  | 34.1%   
2018  | 37.9  | 5,871.2  | 13.0  | 2,016.2  | -3.4%  | 4.9%  | 5.5%  | 37.7%   
2019  | 37.2  | 5,697.3  | 12.6  | 1,934.1  | -3.7%  | 5.4%  | 6.1%  | 41.7%   
2020  | 36.9  | 5,679.2  | 12.6  | 1,942.6  | -2.0%  | 3.7%  | 7.3%  | 47.9%   
2021  | 40.1  | 6,132.8  | 13.4  | 2,047.1  | 5.0%  | 4.1%  | 11.1%  | 49.5%   
2022  | 42.7  | 6,454.9  | 13.9  | 2,109.3  | 3.5%  | 3.6%  | 7.5%  | 48.1%   
2023  | 44.7  | 6,684.3  | 14.3  | 2,143.8  | 2.2%  | 3.5%  | 7.2%  | 48.9%   
2024  | 46.8  | 6,928.6  | 14.7  | 2,183.2  | 2.4%  | 3.5%  | 6.8%  | 50.1%   
2025  | 49.0  | 7,188.3  | 15.3  | 2,237.7  | 2.6%  | 3.5%  | 6.4%  | 50.6%   
2026  | 51.4  | 7,461.3  | 15.9  | 2,312.8  | 2.8%  | 3.5%  | 6.0%  | 50.6%   
  
## Other statistics

Historical GDP per capita development of Nicaragua

**Household income or consumption by percentage share:** _lowest 10%:_ 1.4%;
_highest 10%:_ 41.8 (2005)

**Industrial production growth rate:** 2.4% (2005)

**Electricity - production:** 2.778 billion kWh (2006)

**Electricity - production by source:** _fossil fuel:_ 53.43%; _hydro:_
35.34%; _nuclear:_ 0%; _other:_ 11.23% (1998). A large number of wind turbines
have been installed along the SW shore of Lake Nicaragua since, and some
geothermal plants have been constructed as well. As of 2013, the breakdown
was: _fossil fuel:_ 50%; _wind power:_ 15%; _geothermal:_ 16%, _hydropower:_
12%, _biomass power:_ 7%.

**Electricity - consumption:** 2.929 billion kWh (2006)

**Electricity - exports:** 69.34 million kWh (2006)

**Electricity - imports:** 0 kWh (2006)

**Agriculture - products:** coffee, bananas, sugarcane, cotton, rice, corn,
tobacco, sesame, soya, beans, beef, veal, pork, poultry, dairy products;
shrimp, lobsters

**Exports - commodities:** coffee, beef, shrimp, lobster, cotton, tobacco,
peanuts, sugar, bananas, gold

**Imports - commodities:** consumer goods, machinery equipment, raw materials,
petroleum products

**Currency:** 1 gold Cordoba (C$) = 100 centavos

**Exchange rates:** CÃ³rdoba (C$) per US$1 â€“ 17.582 (2006), 16.733 (2005),
15.937 (2004), 15.105 (2003), 14.251 (2002)

**Price inflation:**

  * 2007: 16.88%
  * 2008: 13.37%