Location of Tuvalu

Tuvalu is a Polynesian island nation located in the Pacific Ocean, midway
between Hawaii and Australia, with a population of 11,192 per the 2017 census.
The economy of Tuvalu is constrained by its remoteness and lack of economies
of scale. Government revenues largely come from fishing licences (primarily
paid under the South Pacific Tuna Treaty); direct grants from international
donors (government donors as well as from the Asian Development Bank); and
income from the Tuvalu Trust Fund. The lease of its highly fortuitous .tv Top
Level Domain (TLD) also contributes revenue. The sale of stamps since the
independence of Tuvalu in 1976 has been an important source of revenue for the
country and government. However, such revenue has significantly declined in
recent years. Tuvalu has hardly any tourism. It has no tour guides, tour
operators, or organised activities, and no cruise ships visit.

World Bank Statistics outline that in 2010 Tuvalu produced a bottom-tier
ranking Gross Domestic Product of $31,350,804 and Gross National Income of
$4,760, compared to other Pacific SIDS states such as Kiribati at $2,010 and
the Marshall Islands at $3,640. A large proportion of national income comes
from the employment of 15% of adult male Tuvaluans overseas in the maritime
industry. The value of these remittances was valued at A$4 million (est. 2006)
and on average accounts for 10% of GDP. A UN Report makes reference to the
fact that these revenue streams are vulnerable to macroeconomic change while
the national budget remains heavily subsidised through international aid and
funding schemes such as the Tuvalu Trust Fund with a strong reliance on the
importation of food, which was estimated at $15.5 million in 2007.

The Tuvalu Trust Fund was established in 1987 by the United Kingdom, Australia
and New Zealand to help supplement national deficits, underpin economic
development, and help the nation achieve greater financial autonomy. The Fund
has contributed roughly A$79 million, 15% of the annual government budget each
year since 1990. With a capital value of about 2.5 times GDP, the Trust Fund
provides an important cushion for Tuvalu's volatile income sources from
fishing and royalties from the sale of the .tv domain. Tuvalu joined the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) on 24 June 2010.

On 5 August 2012, the executive board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
concluded that a slow recovery was underway in Tuvalu and that GDP grew in
2011 led by the private retail sector and education spending.

The increase in inflation in 2022 was due to the rapid rise in the cost of
food resulting from a drought that affected food production and from rising
global food prices, following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (food imports
represent 19 percent of Tuvalu’s GDP, while agriculture makes up for only 10
percent of GDP). The government declared a national state of emergency in
November 2022 as a consequence of a drought that exhausted rainwater supplies.
The government responded to the rising inflation through untargeted “inflation
mitigation payouts” (totalling AUD 400,000 or AUD 40 dollars per eligible
household) and by expanding a list of products under price controls. In 2023,
the IMF Article IV consultation with Tuvalu concluded that a successful
vaccination strategy allowed Tuvalu to lift coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
containment measures at the end of 2022. However, the economic cost of the
pandemic was significant, with real gross domestic product growth falling from
13.8% in 2019 to -4.3 percent in 2020, although it recovered to 1.8% in 2021.
Inflation rose to 11.5% in 2022, but inflation is projected to fall to 2.8% by
2028.

Islands of Tuvalu

## Geography of Tuvalu

Agriculture in Tuvalu is focused on coconut trees and growing pulaka in large
pits of composted soil below the water table. Subsistence farming of coconut
palms to produce copra and fishing remain the primary economic activities,
particularly off the capital island of Funafuti. There is no apparent large
income disparity among the residents, although virtually the only jobs in the
islands that pay a steady wage or salary are with the government, which make
up about two-thirds of those in formal employment. About 15% of adult males
work as seamen on foreign-flagged merchant ships. Population growth on the
outer islands, the limits as to available land and the lack of employment
opportunities, results in a flow of people from the outer islands to the
capital in Funafuti with further pressure to migrate to Australia or New
Zealand. There is high youth unemployment and few new jobs being created.
Given the absence of natural resources (apart from tuna in the territorial
waters), and the constraints imposed on the Tuvaluan economy by its remoteness
and lack of economies of scale, practical policies are needed for improvements
to the livelihoods of the growing numbers of young Tuvaluans who aspire to a
more affluent lifestyle than older generations.

Tuvalu comprises four reef islands and five true atolls that result in a
_contiguous zone:_ 24 nmi (44 km) _exclusive economic zone:_ 200 nmi (370 km)
_territorial sea:_ 12 nmi (22 km). Its nearest neighbours are Kiribati, Nauru,
Samoa and Fiji. Tuvalu has worked with Secretariat of the Pacific Community
(SPC) and the European Union and enacted the Seabed Minerals Act 2014. The
SPC-EU Pacific Deep Sea Minerals Project involves cooperation between the Cook
Islands, Fiji, Tonga and Tuvalu with the object of those countries making
informed decisions about future deep seabed mineral activities.

The population is 10,507 (2017 Census), which makes Tuvalu the third-least
populous sovereign state in the world; as compared to its immediate
neighbours, it has a larger population than Nauru, but is smaller than
Kiribati which has a permanent population of just over 100,000 (2011). In
terms of physical land size, at just 26 square kilometres (10 sq mi) Tuvalu is
the fourth smallest country in the world; as compared to its immediate
neighbours, Tuvalu is larger than Nauru, which is 21 km2 (8.1 sq mi), and
smaller than Kiribati, which comprises groups of atolls dispersed over 3.5
million square kilometres, (1,351,000 square miles) of the Pacific Ocean.
Tuvalu's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) covers an oceanic area of approximately
900,000 km2.

Tuvalu is considered a safe country of unspoiled natural beauty and friendly
people. However, due to its remoteness, the cost of travelling to the island
and limited air traffic to the country, limited numbers of tourists visit each
year. The majority of visitors to Tuvalu are government officials, aid
workers, NGO officials or consultants.

## Tuvalu's economy

### Fishing resources

Tuvaluans are primarily involved in traditional agriculture and fishing. Job
opportunities also exist as observers on tuna boats where the role is to
monitor compliance with the boat's tuna fishing licence.

The Tuvaluan economy, therefore, relies heavily on its fishing income, with
42% of the Tuvaluan population involved in fishing activity at various levels.
The fishing in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) mainly consists of Skipjack
Tuna, Yellowfin Tuna and Bigeye Tuna. UN Data calculated a gross value of
fisheries at US$43,773,582 (2007 est), which accounted for the output of
coastal commercial fishing, coastal subsistence fishing, locally based
offshore fishing, foreign-based offshore fishing, freshwater fishing and
aquaculture. In recent years all of the income has been generated through the
listed activities in Tuvalu waters, rather than through exports direct from
Tuvalu. The activities of international fishing vessels, which in 2008
comprised 42 longline fishing vessels, 3 pole/line vessels and 126 purse
seiners, far outweigh domestic activity, with a production volume of 35,541
tonnes worth US$40,924,370 (2009 est) or 93.5% of gross value, although Tuvalu
retains a sizeable share in income via licensing. Fishing licensing agreements
with Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, New Zealand and the United States generated
an income of A$9 million in 2009. In 2013 revenue from fishing licenses
doubled to more than 45% of GDP.

On 29 June 2017, the National Fishing Corporation of Tuvalu (NAFICOT), signed
a joint venture agreement with the Republic of Korea's SAJO Fishing Industry
to operate the fishing vessel _M.V. Taina_ within the Tuvaluan EEZ and other
Pacific Island waters.

The 2021 Budget of Tuvalu set out a shift in government policy regarding
engagement in fishing activities, with a shift from joint venture arrangements
(including the sale of _FV Taumoana_ for $10.4 million) to just receiving
revenue from fishing licenses and receiving management fees for flagged ships.

### Remittances from Tuvaluan seafarers

Tuvalu men have for some time been employed abroad, working on container
ships, primarily on German-owned ships. Remittances from seafarers is a major
source of income for their families in Tuvalu. In 2002, the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) approved an assistance package to upgrade the Tuvalu Maritime
Training Institute (TMTI) which trains young Tuvaluans so they can work aboard
foreign vessels. This project was completed in 2011.

The Great Recession impacted global export-import activities and the demand
for shipping, which reduced the need for Tuvaluan seafarers.

The 1991 census identified 272 seaman working on merchant ships. In 2002 the
Tuvaluan Overseas Seaman's Union (TOSU) estimated the number as 417 seaman
working on ships. In 2011 the ADB estimated there were 800 TMTI graduates
registered for employment as seafarers. The ADB identified that the number of
Tuvaluans employed as seafarers has decreased steadily from about 340 in 2001
to only 205 in 2010; so that of a total pool of 800 qualified seafarers,
including those on leave, almost 450 were unemployed. This decline in seafarer
employment has reduced remittances from $2.4 million in 2001 to a projected
$1.2 million in 2010. The International Labour Organization (ILO) also
estimates that in 2010 there were approximately 200 Tuvaluan seafarers on
ships. The International Monetary Fund 2014 Country Report described the
effect of the GFC as reducing demand for the services of Tuvaluan seafarers.
As of October 2013, there were about 112 Tuvalu seafarers working on cargo
ships, compared to 361 in 2006. The consequence is that remittances from
seafarers to their families in Tuvalu fell by about 9% of GDP for Tuvalu. In
2012 such remittances were 10% of GDP for Tuvalu.

While a budget deficit of A$0.4 million was projected for 2015, the ADB
assessed the budget as being A$14.3m in surplus as the result of high tuna
fish license fees. The ADB predicted that the 2% growth rate for 2015 would
continue into 2016.

### Economic vulnerability

Funafuti

From 1996 to 2002, Tuvalu was one of the best performing Pacific Island
economies and achieved an average real gross domestic product (GDP) growth
rate of 5.6% per annum. Since 2002 economic growth has slowed as Tuvalu was
exposed to rapid rises in world prices of fuel and food with the level of
inflation peaking at 10% in 2008, and falling to 0% in November 2010.

However, due to the acute level of geographic, macroeconomic and financial
isolation, scale of area, population infrastructure and agriculture, climate
change, oil dependency, contracting GDP and economic dependency many sources
in this decade view Tuvalu as an extremely vulnerable economy. The country is
also dependent on imported fuel, with gas prices quoted at $12/gal (2009). The
high cost of petroleum products has encouraged the development of projects to
access renewable energy in Tuvalu.

Although listed by the UN as a Lower Middle Income LDC, it scores very high in
terms of Economic Vulnerability Index, with a rating of 79.7 out of 100 in
2009, leading the UN to state that Tuvalu is the most "economically vulnerable
country in the world". Due to the factors addressed earlier, Tuvalu yields
limited revenue from exports.

## Public sector enterprises

Offices of the Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation

The public sector enterprises are the National Fishing Corporation of Tuvalu
(NAFICOT), National Bank of Tuvalu, Development Bank of Tuvalu, Tuvalu
Electricity Corporation, Tuvalu Telecommunications Corporation, Tuvalu
Philatelic Bureau, Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute and Vaiaku Lagi Hotel.

The government is the primary provider of medical services through Princess
Margaret Hospital on Funafuti, which operates medical clinics on the other
islands.[_citation needed_]

Banking services are provided by the National Bank of Tuvalu. Effective of 7
October 2016, Tuvalu accepted the Article VIII obligations of the IMF Articles
of Agreement, to maintaining an exchange system free of restrictions on
payments for international transactions.

The Tuvalu Media Department of the Government of Tuvalu operates one station
on the AM frequencies under the title of _Radio Tuvalu_. _Fenui – news from
Tuvalu_ is a free digital publication of the Tuvalu Media Department that is
emailed to subscribers and operates a Facebook page, which publishes news
about government activities and news about Tuvaluan events, such as a special
edition covering the results of the 2015 general election.

The Tuvalu National Provident Fund (TNPF) and the Copra Trading Co-operative
(CTC) are owned by the members of each organisation. The TNPF provides its
members with loans, for which each member's account is used as collateral. The
Tuvalu Cooperative Society is the main wholesaler and retailer in Tuvalu.

## Private sector enterprises

The Tuvalu National Private Sector Organisation, the Tuvalu National Chamber
of Commerce and Tuvalu Business Centre are active in supporting private sector
enterprises. In order to set up a business in Tuvalu, an investor needs a
start-up capital of AUD$20,000, a Tuvaluan partner and pay a business
registration fee of AUD$100. As of 2010 there are only seven foreign-owned
businesses operating in Tuvalu, which were mostly set up by Asian small
business operators in the retail and restaurant sector.

Mackenzie Trading Limited, established by Mackenzie Kiritome in 2008, operates
small retail outlets in the outer islands to sell merchandise in competition
with the Co-operative Society (which is a community-owned enterprise). In 2010
Mackenzie Trading Limited employed 40 people. Other supermarkets on Funafuti
include the Edwin Food City store, the Messamasui Supermarket, the SULANI
Trading store and the JY Ocean Trading stores. Government regulations prohibit
trading on Sundays.

## Development of economic and social policy (_Te Kakeega_ /_Te Kete_)

Flag of Tuvalu

_Te Kakeega_ was the statement of the national strategy for the sustainable
development of Tuvalu, with economic and social goals intended to be achieved
in the period 2005 to 2015. After consultations on each islands the National
Summit on Sustainable Development (NSSD), was held at the _Tausoalima
Falekaupule_ in Funafuti from 28 June to 9 July 2004. The meeting resulted in
the _Malefatuga_ Declaration, which is the foundation of _Te Kakeega II -
National Strategy for Sustainable Development-2005-2015_ , which “contained
all the known aid projects, programmes, development initiatives and ideas
adopted by the donors and the two successive Tuvalu governments (2004-2006 and
2006 to present)”.

The _Te Kakeega III - National Strategy for Sustainable Development 2016-2020_
(TK III) includes new strategic areas, in addition to the eight identified in
TK II. The additional strategic areas are climate change; environment;
migration and urbanization; and oceans and seas.

In the national strategy plan for 2021–2030, the name _Te Kakeega_ was
replaced by _Te Kete_ which is the name of a domestic traditional basket woven
from green or brown coconut leaves. Symbolically, _Te Kete_ has biblical
significance for Tuvaluan Christian traditions by referencing the basket or
the cradle that saved the life of Moses.

## Tuvalu Trust Fund

The Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF) was established in 1987 by the United Kingdom,
Australia, New Zealand with about A$27 million in capital. The TTF, a
prudently managed overseas investment fund, has contributed roughly (A$79
million), 15% of the annual government budget each year since 1990. With a
capital value of about 3.5 times GDP, the TTF provides an important cushion
for Tuvalu's volatile income sources from fishing and royalties from the sale
of the dot-TV domain.

The IMF 2014 Country Report noted the market value of the TTF dropped during
the Great Recession, however by 2014 the total value of the fund had recovered
to more than $A140 million (3.5 times GDP). In 2018 the TTF amounted to about
A$179 million. In 2021 the TTF amounted to about A$192 million. In 2021 the
market value of the TTF rose by 12 percent to its highest level on record (261
percent of GDP). However, the volatility in global equity markets in 2022
resulted in the TTF’s value falling to A$191 million.

The capital of the Trust Fund is known as the “A Account”. The "B Account" or
“Consolidated Investment Fund” (CIF) is a revolving “buffer account” that
receives funds from the returns or “disbursements” of the "A Account". The
operation of the Trust Fund through two accounts assists in stabilising the
long-term financial situation of the Government of Tuvalu as well as
addressing short-term budget needs. The "B Account", which belongs exclusively
to the Government, holds income distributions from the "A Account" until funds
are needed to be used for the national budget. It, therefore, serves as a
buffer against the volatility of the ‘A Account’ returns, i.e., during years
when there are no returns or low returns. Brian Bell, a member of the Tuvalu
Trust Fund Advisory Committee from the inception of the Trust Fund in 1987 to
2002, describes the purpose of the Trust Fund as being:

    “The Tuvalu Trust Fund was aimed at providing a source of revenue to overcome a chronic budget deficit situation. The revenue is distributed to the Government from the A Account to the B Account. The amount needed is then drawn down into the consolidated revenue account as an additional source of revenue for expenditure on government services through the recurrent budget.”

The 20th-anniversary review of the Tuvalu Trust Fund described the performance
as being that:

    “In the first twenty years of operation the Fund has grown to $106.6 million in Market Value as of 30 June 2007. The real rate of return on the Fund has averaged 6.2 percent per annum providing $65.7 million in revenue to Tuvalu. Of this $24.1 million has been used to help fund budget deficits, $29.2 million has been reinvested in the Fund and $12.4 million is held in the CIF awaiting drawdown as of 30 June 2007. The Government's subsequent reinvestments back into the Fund since inception raises Tuvalu's contributions to the Fund to $29.8 million including the initial contribution of $1.6 million. It makes Tuvalu the major contributor to the Fund, which is evidence of Tuvalu's commitment to the long term sustainability of the Fund.”

## Falekaupule Trust Fund

In 1999 the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the government of Tuvalu set up
the Falekaupule Trust Fund, which is intended to improve services on the outer
islands. The island councils – composed of traditional leaders – are
responsible for managing their own finances from a budget allocated from the
Tuvaluan government from the Falekaupule Trust Fund. Under the Falekaupule
Act, _Falekaupule_ means “traditional assembly in each island...composed in
accordance with the Aganu of each island”. _Aganu_ means traditional custom
and culture. The initial capital of Falekaupule Trust Fund was A$12 million.
The market value of the FTF has increased:

    “As at 30 June 2007, the FTF's market value stood at $25.3 million. After eight years of operation, the FTF has made three distributions totalling to $4.7 million. A Reserve Account was established in 2005 having the exact same purpose as the CIF, which is to smooth out the stream of revenue from the main investment. At 30 June 2007, the FTF's Reserve Account was $1.4 million.”

The Great Recession affected the FTF, which is required to maintain its value
in real terms before a distribution can be made. As of 30 September 2010, the
maintained value was $27.3 million; the result of capital growth and
contributions from development partners. This is some $3.5 million higher than
the market value of $23.8 million. The gap of 15% between the market value and
the maintained value must be recouped before another distribution can be made.
Since the commencement of FTF, there have been four years in which
distributions were made. The FTF has distributed $6.4 million with some $5.3
million allocated to island development (the balance of $1.1 million is held
in reserve by the communities). This equates to an average of $55,000 spent
per island per year.

## Government revenue

Government revenues largely come from sales of stamps and coins, fishing
licences, income from the Tuvalu Ship Registry, income from the TTF, and from
the lease of its highly fortuitous .tv Internet Top Level Domain (TLD).

### Tuvalu Trust Fund

Government office building in Funafuti

The Tuvalu Trust Fund was established for the intended purpose of helping to
supplement national deficits, underpin economic development, and help the
nation achieve greater financial autonomy. The Trust Fund, has contributed
roughly (A$79 million) 15% of the annual government budget each year since
1990. With a capital value of about 2.5 times GDP, the Trust Fund provides an
important cushion for Tuvalu's volatile income sources from fishing and
royalties from the sale of the .tv domain. Meeting the needs of the 2013/14
budget of the Tuvaluan Government will require drawing from funds held in the
“Consolidated Investment Fund” (CIF) of the Tuvalu Trust Fund.

### Fishing Licenses

Fishing licences are an important source of revenue. The fishing in the
900,000 km2 of water area mainly consists of Skipjack Tuna, Yellowfin Tuna and
Bigeye Tuna. Payments from US government made under the South Pacific Tuna
Treaty (SPTT) was about $9 million in 1999. In May 2013 representatives from
the United States and the Pacific Islands countries agreed to sign interim
arrangement documents to extend the Multilateral Fisheries Treaty (which
encompasses the South Pacific Tuna Treaty) to confirm access to the fisheries
in the Western and Central Pacific for US tuna boats for 18 months. In 2015,
Tuvalu has refused to sell fishing days to certain nations and fleets that
have blocked Tuvaluan initiatives to develop and sustain their own fishery. In
2016, Dr Puakena Boreham, the Minister of Natural Resources, drew attention to
Article 30 of the WCPF Convention, which describes the collective obligation
of members to consider the disproportionate burden that management measures
might place on small-island developing states.

### .tv Domain

The ".tv" domain name generates around A$7 million each year from royalties.
In 2019, 8.4% of total government revenue came from .tv royalties. The domain
name is sought after due to its similarity to the abbreviation of the word
television. VeriSign, Inc managed the .tv domain with the agreement running
until 2021. On 14 December 2021 the Ministry of Justice, Communication and
Foreign Affairs of the Tuvalu Government announced that they had selected
GoDaddy Registry as the new registry service provider, after Verisign did not
participate in the process. The success of Twitch.tv and other esports and
video game platforms means that Tuvalu can expect to derive increased revenue
from the domain.

### Economic Assessment

The Asian Development Bank described the Global Economic Crisis (GEC) as
impacting on Tuvalu through: “(i) lower demand for Tuvalu seafarers and,
therefore, falling remittances; (ii) volatile exchange rate movements
affecting the value of remittances, revenues from fishing licence fees, and
food prices; and (iii) lower market value of the Tuvalu Trust Fund (TTF),
which at the end of May 2010 was about 12% below the maintained value. Thus,
as a direct result of the GEC, no distribution was made from the fund to the
budget for 2010 and further distributions are unlikely while there is
uncertainty in international financial markets.”

The IMF 2010 Country Report describes economic activity in Tuvalu as dampened
by lower offshore earnings, with “[t]he economy is expected to have almost no
growth in 2010, and growth is projected to be zero or even turn negative in
2011, led by lower government spending, and remain low over the medium term.”

The IMF 2014 Country Report noted that real GDP growth had been volatile
averaging only 1 percent in the past decade. The 2014 Country Report describes
economic growth prospects as generally positive as the result of large
revenues from fishing licenses, together with substantial foreign aid, "while,
over the medium to long run, growth prospects may be hampered by the dominance
of inefficient public enterprise in the economy, uncertainty in the fisheries
sector, and weak competitiveness."

The IMF 2021 Country Report concluded that swift implementation of COVID-19
containment measures and COVID-related fiscal spending financed by buoyant
fishing revenues and donor grants have allowed Tuvalu to avoid a recession in
2020.

## Least developed country status

The United Nations designates Tuvalu as a least developed country because of
its limited potential for economic development, absence of exploitable
resources and its small size and vulnerability to external economic and
environmental shocks. Tuvalu participates in the Enhanced Integrated Framework
for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries, which was
established in October 1997 under the auspices of the World Trade
Organisation. In 2013 Tuvalu deferred its graduation from least developed
country status to a developing country to 2015. Prime Minister Enele Sopoaga
said that this deferral was necessary to maintain access by Tuvalu to the
funds provided by the United Nations's National Adaptation Programme of Action
(NAPA), as "Once Tuvalu graduates to a developed country, it will not be
considered for funding assistance for climate change adaptation programmes
like NAPA, which only goes to LDCs". Tuvalu had met targets so that Tuvalu was
to graduate from LDC status. Prime minister, Enele Sopoaga wants the United
Nations to reconsider its criteria for graduation from LDC status as not
enough weight is given to the environmental plight of small island states like
Tuvalu in the application of the Environmental Vulnerability Index.

## International aid

Australia and New Zealand continue to contribute capital to the Tuvalu Trust
Fund and provide other forms of development assistance. Financial support to
Tuvalu is also provided by Japan, South Korea and the European Union.

Tuvalu joined the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 1993. To improve aid
effectiveness, the government of Tuvalu, ADB, AusAID, and NZAID signed the
Development Partners Declaration (DPD) in 2009. The DPD is designed to improve
aid effectiveness, both in the implementation of specific projects and in
assisting the Tuvaluan government achieve performance benchmark indicators.

Tuvalu became a member of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in July 2010
and also joined the World Bank. In 2013 the World Bank approved US$6.06
million in finance for the existing Tuvalu Aviation Investment Project (TvAIP)
for the purpose of improving operational safety and oversight of international
air transport and associated infrastructure at Funafuti International Airport.

Tuvalu participates in the Enhanced Integrated Framework for Trade-Related
Technical Assistance to Least Developed Countries, which was established in
October 1997 under the auspices of the World Trade Organisation. In 2013
Tuvalu deferred its graduation from Least Developed Country status to a
developing country to 2015. Prime Minister Enele Sopoaga said that this
deferral was necessary to maintain access by Tuvalu to the funds provided by
the United Nations's National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), as “Once
Tuvalu graduates to a developed country, it will not be considered for funding
assistance for climate change adaptation programmes like NAPA, which only goes
to LDCs”. Tuvalu had met targets so that Tuvalu was to graduate from LDC
status. Prime minister, Enele Sopoaga wants the United Nations to reconsider
its criteria for graduation from LDC status as not enough weight is given to
the environmental plight of small island states like Tuvalu. Sopoaga said
that:

    “The present application of those criteria we feel is totally unrealistic and perhaps very very wrong. We need to address that. The application of the current criteria - we have no problem with the criteria but the application - Environmental Vulnerability Index must be one of the two.”

On 18 February 2016, Tuvalu signed the Pacific Islands Development Forum
Charter and formally joined the Pacific Islands Development Forum (PIDF). In
June 2017, Tuvalu signed the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations
(PACER).

## Climate change mitigation and cyclone recovery programs

The South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) suggests that, while
Tuvalu is vulnerable to climate change, environmental problems such as
population growth and poor coastal management also affect sustainable
development. SOPAC ranks the country as extremely vulnerable using the
Environmental Vulnerability Index. Tuvalu's National Adaptation Programme of
Action (NAPA) describes a response to the climate change problem as using the
combined efforts of several local bodies on each island that will work with
the local community leaders (the Falekaupule). The main office, named the
Department of Environment, is responsible for coordinating the non-
governmental organizations, religious bodies, and stakeholders. Each of the
named groups are responsible for implementing Tuvalu's NAPA, the main plan to
adapt to the adverse effects of human use and climate change.

The establishment of the A$5 million Tuvalu Survival Fund (TSF) in the 2016
Tuvaluan budget was intended for climate change mitigation and the recovery
expenses that followed the impact of Cyclone Pam, which impacted Tuvalu in
2015.

The Tuvalu Coastal Adaptation Project (TCAP) was launched in 2017 for the
purpose of enhancing the resilience of the islands of Tuvalu to meet the
challenges resulting from higher sea levels. Tuvalu was the first country in
the Pacific to access climate finance from Green Climate Fund, with the
support of the UNDP. In December 2022, work on the Funafuti reclamation
project commenced. The project is to dredge sand from the lagoon to construct
a platform on Fongafale, Funafuti that is 780 meters long and 100 meters wide,
which is designed to remain above sea level rise and the reach of storm waves
beyond the year 2100. The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
(DFAT) also provided funding for the TCAP. Further projects that are part of
TCAP are capital works on the outer islands of Nanumea and Nanumaga aimed at
reducing exposure to coastal damage resulting from storms.

On 26 September 2023, the World Bank (WB) approved US$11.5 million (AUD$18
million) in new grant financing to Tuvalu as part of the WB’s First Climate
and Disaster Resilience Development Policy Financing program. This WB support
includes a development policy grant of US$7.5 million (AU$11.8 million). This
grant is directed to assisting Tuvalu's National Disaster Management Office in
coordinating post-disaster response activities; as well to the work of
Tuvalu’s National Building Code Assessment Unit, of the Public Works
Department, to develop more disaster-resilient infrastructure in Tuvalu. The
WB program includes an additional Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat
DDO) of US$4 million (AU$6.3 million). The Cat DDO funds are made available to
Tuvalu in the event of a natural disaster. The purpose of the WB grant is to
support improved monitoring and reporting for the assessment of Tuvalu’s
climate and disaster risks, and to help the government fast-track the flow of
critical supplies to the islands of Tuvalu following emergencies and natural
disasters.

## GDP and other economic performance indicators

Information sourced from:

  * This article incorporates public domain material from _The World Factbook_. CIA.
  * "Tuvalu: 2010 Article IV Consultation-Staff Report; Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Tuvalu". International Monetary Fund Country Report No. 11/46. 8 February 2011. Retrieved 4 September 2011.
  * "Tuvalu: 2014 Article IV Consultation-Staff Report; Public Information Notice on the Executive Board Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Tuvalu" (PDF). International Monetary Fund Country Report No. 14/253. August 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2016.
  * "Tuvalu: 2016 Article IV Consultation-Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for Tuvalu" (PDF). International Monetary Fund Country Report No. 14/253. 4 October 2016. p. 7. Retrieved 4 February 2018.
  * "Tuvalu: 2018 Article IV Consultation-Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for Tuvalu". International Monetary Fund Country Report No. 18/209. 5 July 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2018.
  * "Tuvalu: 2021 Article IV Consultation-Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for Tuvalu". International Monetary Fund Country Report No. 21/176. August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021.
  * "Tuvalu: 2023 Article IV Consultation-Press Release; Staff Report; and Statement by the Executive Director for Tuvalu". International Monetary Fund Country Report No. 2023/267. 21 July 2023. Retrieved 24 September 2023.
  * "2024 Tuvalu National Budget" presented on 20 November 2023 by the Honourable Seve Paeniu, Minister of Finance.

The Tuvaluan dollar and the Australian dollar (A$) are both official
currencies of Tuvalu.

_Currency_ : 1 Tuvaluan dollar ($T) or 1 Australian dollar (A$) = 100 cents

_GDP_ :

  * A$0.068 Billion (nominal, 2019 est.)
  * A$0.07 Billion (nominal, 2020 est.)
  * A$0.074 Billion (nominal, 2021 est.)
  * A$0.049 Billion (PPP, 2019 est.)
  * A$0.05 Billion (PPP, 2020 est.)
  * A$0.052 Billion (PPP, 2021 est.)

_GDP - nominal_: A$47 million (2015); A$49 million (2016); A$59.1 million
(2017); A$64.4 million (2018); A$77.9 million (2019); A$75.2 million (2020);
A$80.1 million (2021); A$85.2 million (2022 est.); A$93.8 (2023 proj.);
A$100.9 (2024 proj.); A$107.9 (2025 proj.).

_GNI \- GNI per capita_: $4,760 (2010)

_GDP \- per capita_: $2,447 (2009); $3,400 (2015 est.); $3,700 (2016 est.);
$3,898 (2017 est.); $3,948 (2018 est.); $4,281 (2019 est.); 4,515
(A$7,152)(2021 est.)

_GDP – composition by sector_:

Agriculture: 24.5% (2012 est.)

Industry: 5.6% (2012 est.)

Services: 70% (2012 est.)

__Growth and inflation_ :_

**Growth and inflation:**  
(percentage change) | 2008 est. | 2009 est. | 2010 est. | 2011 est. | 2012 est. | 2013 est. | 2014 est. | 2015 est. | 2016 est.   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Real GDP growth | 6% | -4% | -2.7% | 8.4% | 0.2% | 1.3% | 2.2% | 9.1% | 3.0%   
Consumer price inflation (end of period): | 10% | 0% | -1.9% | 0.5% | 1.4% | 2% | 3.3% | 4.0% | 2.6%   
**Growth and inflation:**  
(percentage change) | 2017 est. | 2018 est. | 2019 est. | 2020 est. | 2021 est. | 2022 est. | 2023 proj. | 2024 proj. | 2025 proj.   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Real GDP growth | 3.2% | 4.3% | 13.8% | -4.3% | 1.8% | 0.7% | 3.9% | 3.5% | 2.4%   
Consumer price inflation (period average): | 4.1% | 2.2% | 3.5% | 1.9% | 6.2% | 11.5% | 5.9% | 3.7% | 3.4%   
  
_Industrial production growth rate_ : -26.1% (2012 est.)

_Total population_ : 10,632 (2022 Census)

_Labor force - by occupation_ : people make a living mainly through
exploitation of the sea, reefs, and atolls and from wages sent home by those
working abroad in Australia and New Zealand and sailors working on merchant
ships.

_Labour force_ : 3,615 (2004 est.)

_Unemployment rate_ : 16.3% (2004)

_Population below poverty line_ : 26.3% (2010 est.)

__Budget (2010 to 2013)_ :_

Budget | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | 2013   
---|---|---|---|---  
Total revenues and grants | A$24.9 million | A$26.3 million | A$32.5 million | A$42.7 million   
Total expenditures | A$33.2 million | A$29.7 million | A$28.9 million | A$32.2 million   
  
__Budget (2014 to 2019)_ :_

Budget | 2014 actual | 2015 actual | 2016 actual | 2017 actual | 2018 actual | 2019 actual   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Total domestic revenue | A$41.97 m | A$52.12 m | A$71.1 m | A$63.50 m | A$59.23 m | A$55.74 m   
Total recurrent expenditure | A$37.07 m | A$46.82 m | A$57.07 m | A$51.94 m | A$38.15 m | A$58.35 m   
_Structural balance_ | A$4.90 m | A$5.30 m | A$14.03 m | A$11.57 m | A$21.09 m | (A$2.61 m)   
Non recurrent expenditure | A$4.42 m | A$13.8 m | A$19.28 m | A$16.38 m | A$16.23 m | A$26.5 m   
Statutory expenditure |  |  | A$609,112 | A$699,850 | A$549,222 | A$772,181   
_Domestic funding gap_ | A$479,778 | (A$8.5 m) | (A$5.86 m) | (A$5.52 m) | A$4.3 m | A$29.89 m   
Funded by: development partner assistance – recurrent | A$5 m | A$3.22 m | A$8.5 m | A$8.33 m | A$4.05 m | A$9.17 m   
Funded by: development partner assistance – non recurrent | A$6.62 m | A$9.86 m | A$6.9 m | A$4.63 m | A$5.77 m | A$19.35 m   
_Budget surplus (deficit)_ | A$12.11 m | A$4.58 m | A$9.55 m | A$7.44 m | A$14.12 m | (A$1.36 m)   
  
__Budget (2020 to 2023)_ :_

Budget | 2020 est. | 2021 est. | 2022 project. | 2023 project.   
---|---|---|---|---  
Total domestic revenue | A$64.99 m | A$54.08 m | A$44.63 m | A$44.83 m   
Total recurrent expenditure | A$56.61 m | A$72.76 m | A$73.14 m | A$73.49 m   
_Structural balance_ | A$8.38 m | A$18.68 m | A$28.51 m | A$28.66 m   
Non recurrent expenditure | A$30.73 m | A$33.84 m | A$16 m | A$16 m   
Statutory expenditure | A$769,700 | A$1.5 m | A$1.33 m | A$1.33 m   
_Domestic funding gap_ | (A$29.89 m) | (A$15.04 m) | (A$14.72 m) |   
Funded by: development partner assistance | A$28.66 m | A$34.58 m | A$34.58 m | A$34.58 m   
_Budget surplus (deficit)_ | A$5.54 m | - | A$10.82 m | A$11.33 m   
  
__Government finance_ :_

**Government finance:**  
(as a percentage of GDP) | 2015 | 2016 | 2017 | 2018 | 2019 | 2020 | 2021 | 2022 est. | 2023 proj. | 2024 proj. | 2025 proj.   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
_Revenue and grants_ | 136% | 138% | 108.6% | 156.1% | 111.8% | 129.4% | 102.6% | 119.8% | 110.5% | 107% | 101.4%   
Current Revenue: | 102% | 113% | 86.6% | 118.1% | 82.9% | 95.6% | 86.4% | 89% | 67.9% | 72.9% | 71%   
_Of which_ , fishing licence fees | 51% | 68% | 44.1% | 79.8% | 49% | 58.8% | 49.2% | 45.6% | 38.6% | 43.6% | 41.7%   
Grants: | 34% | 25% | 21.9% | 38% | 28.9% | 33.7% | 16.2% | 30.7% | 42.6% | 34.2% | 30.4%   
_Total expenditure_ | 121% | 131% | 106.5% | 125.8% | 112.9% | 121.2% | 116.5% | 111% | 109.3% | 105.9% | 104.7%   
Current expenditure: | 99% | 111% | 84% | 81.8% | 70.8% | 78.6% | 93.3% | 98.2% | 98.2% | 94.7% | 93.1%   
Capital expenditure (note 1): | 22% | 19% | 22.4% | 43.9% | 42.1% | 46.1% | 30.1% | 20.9% | 24% | 26.1% | 26.1%   
_Overall balance_ | 15% | 7% | 2.1% | 30.3% | -1.1% | 8.2% | -13.8% | 8.8% | 1.1% | 1.1% | -3.3%   
_Overall balance_ (excluding grants) | -47% | -67% | -41.5% | -43.6% | -30% | -25.6% | -30.1% | -22% | -41.4% | -33% | -33.7%   
_Of which_ , domestic current balance (note 2) | -47% | -67% | -41.5% | -43.6% | -36.8% | -32.6% | -60.8% | -58.9% | -56% | -50.6% | -49.3%   
  
Note 1: Includes Special Development Fund and infrastructure development.

Note 2: Domestic current balance excludes fishing revenue, grants, and capital
expenditure.

_Electricity - installed generating capacity_ : 5,100 kW (2011)

_Electricity - from fossil fuels_ : 96% of total installed capacity (2015
est.)

_Industries_ : fishing, tourism, copra

_Agriculture - products_ : coconuts; fish

_Exports_ : $2.232 million (2022 est) $1 million (f.o.b., 2004); $600,000
(2010 est.)

_Exports - commodities_ : copra, fish

_Exports - partners_ : Thailand 88%, Japan 6%, Philippines 3%, Ireland 1%, USA
1% (2023)

_Imports_ : $57.388 million (2022 est), $12.91 million (c.i.f., 2005); $238.6
million (2012 est.); $136.5 million (2013 est.)

_Imports - commodities_ : food, animals, mineral fuels, machinery,
manufactured goods

_Imports - partners_ : China 42%, Fiji 24%, Japan 11%, Australia 11%, NZ 4%
(2023)

_Economic aid - recipient_ : $30.4 (2009); $19.7 million (2010 est.) note -
major donors are Australia, New Zealand, European Union, Japan, and the US

_Exchange rates_ : Tuvaluan dollars or Australian dollars per US dollar -
1.505 (2023 est.), 1.0902 (2010), 1.2822 (2009), 1.2137 (2007), 1.3285 (2006);
0.9695 (2011 est.); 0.97 (2012 est.); 1.1094 (2013 est.); 1.67 (2014 est.);
1.33 (2015 est.)

_Fiscal year_ : calendar year