Part of a series on  
---  
Jordan  
Geography  
  
  * Climate
  * Governorates
  * Nahias
  * Cities
  * Mediterranean
  * Jordan River
  * Nature reserves
  * Extreme points

  
History  
|

  * Timeline
  * Syria (region)

  
---  
Pre-modern history  
  
  * Ammon
  * Moab
  * Edom
  * Nabataeans
  * Ghassanids
  * Islamic Empire
  * Oultrejordain
  * Arab Kingdom of Syria
  * Ottoman Empire

  
Hashemite rule  
  
  * Hashemites
  * Arab Revolt
  * Sykes–Picot
  * Transjordan memo
  * British Mandate
  * Emirate of Transjordan
  * Kura Rebellion
  * Adwan Rebellion
  * Ikhwan raids
  * 1948 War
  * 1967 War
  * Black September
  * Israel–Jordan peace treaty
  * 2011 protests

  
Economy  
  
  * International rankings
  * Globalization
  * Agriculture
  * Defense industry
  * Tourism
  * Petra World Heritage Site
  * Oil shale
  * Renewable energy
  * Nuclear energy
  * Water supply

  
Demographics / Culture  
  
  * Religion
  * Freedom of religion
  * Islam
  * Christianity
  * Jordanian Arabic
  * Art
  * Cinema
  * Cuisine
  * Music
  * Sports
  * Scouts and Guides
  * Holidays
  * Prominent Jordanians

  
Health / Education  
  
  * Hospitals
  * Medical education
  * Universities
  * University of Jordan
  * Education and Research Ministry
  * Science and technology in Jordan

  
Government / Politics  
  
  * Constitution
  * Kings
  * Prime Ministers
  * Cabinet
  * Parliament
  * Elections
  * Political parties
  * Law enforcement
  * Central Bank
  * Foreign affairs
  * Human rights

  
Armed Forces  
  
  * Army
  * Air
  * Naval
  * Special forces (JSOC)
  * Maintenance Corps
  * Intelligence
  * Jordan Royal Guard
  * Design and Development Bureau
  * Military ranks
  * Arab Legion

  
Transportation  
  
  * Airports
  * Queen Alia Airport
  * Royal Jordanian Airlines
  * Railways
  * Aqaba seaport

  
Communications  
  
  * Newspapers
  * Internet
  * Jordan Radio & TV Corporation (JRTV)
  * ATV Jordan

  
  
  * Jordan portal
  * Index
  * Outline

  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The **economy of Jordan** is classified by the World Food Programme as an
upper-middle income economy, as well as being poor in resources with limited
land for agriculture. Jordan's GDP per capita rose by 351% in the 1970s,
declined 30% in the 1980s, and rose 36% in the 1990s. After King Abdullah II's
accession to the throne in 1999, liberal economic policies were introduced.
Jordan's economy had been growing at an annual rate of 8% between 1999 and
2008. However, growth slowed to 2% after the Arab Spring in 2011. The
substantial increase of the population, coupled with slowed economic growth
and rising public debt, led to a worsening of poverty and unemployment in the
country. As of 2023, Jordan has a GDP of US$50.85 billion, ranking it 89th
worldwide.

Jordan has free trade agreements with the United States, Canada, Singapore,
Malaysia, the European Union, Tunisia, Algeria, Libya, Turkey and Syria. More
free trade agreements were planned with Iraq, the Palestinian Authority, the
GCC, Lebanon, and Pakistan. Jordan is a member of the Greater Arab Free Trade
Agreement, the Euro-Mediterranean free trade area, the Agadir Agreement, and
also enjoys advanced status with the EU.

Jordan's economic resource base centers on phosphates, potash, and their
fertilizer derivatives; tourism; overseas remittances; and foreign aid. These
are its principal sources of hard currency earnings. Lacking coal reserves,
hydroelectric power, large tracts of forest or commercially viable oil
deposits, Jordan relies on natural gas for 93% of its domestic energy needs.
Jordan used to depend on Iraq for oil until the American-led 2003 invasion of
Iraq. Jordan also has a plethora of industrial zones producing goods in the
textile, aerospace, defense, ICT, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic sectors. Jordan
is an emerging knowledge economy.

The main obstacles to Jordan's economy are scarce water supplies, complete
reliance on oil imports for energy, and regional instability. Just over 10% of
its land is arable and the water supply is limited. Rainfall is low and highly
variable, and much of Jordan's available ground water is not renewable.

Jordan's total foreign debt in 2011 was $19 billion, representing 60% of its
GDP. In 2016, the debt reached $35.1 billion representing 93.4% of its GDP.
This was attributed to regional instability, causing a decrease in tourist
activity and foreign investments along with increased military expenditure.
Other factors were attacks on the Egyptian pipeline supplying the Kingdom with
gas, the collapse of trade with Iraq and Syria; expenses from hosting Syrian
refugees and accumulated interest from loans. According to the World Bank,
Syrian refugees cost Jordan more than $2.5 billion a year, amounting to 6% of
the GDP and 25% of the government's annual revenue. Wage growth declined due
to competition for jobs between refugees and Jordan citizens. The downturn
that began in 2011 continued until 2018. The country's top five contributing
sectors to GDP, government services, finance, manufacturing, transport, and
tourism and hospitality were badly impacted by the Syrian civil war. Foreign
aid covered only a small part of these costs, 63% of the total costs are
covered by Jordan. An austerity programme was adopted by the government to
reduce Jordan's debt-to-GDP ratio to 77% by 2021. The programme succeeded in
preventing the debt from rising above 95% in 2018. The yearly growth rate of
the economy was 2% from 2016 to 2019, compared to 6.4% from 2000 to 2009.

On 15 May, 2025 Jordan and the UAE activatet their Comprehensive Economic
Partnership Agreement (CEPA), marking a significant step in strengthening
bilateral economic ties. Signed in 2023 under the leadership of King Abdullah
II and President Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed, the agreement aims to boost trade,
reduce tariffs, and enhance investment across key sectors such as industry,
renewable energy, and tourism. It establishes frameworks for cooperation,
including a joint investment council, and targets increasing non-oil trade to
over $8 billion by 2032. As the UAE’s first CEPA with an Arab country, the
deal underscores a shared commitment to regional integration, SME empowerment,
and long-term economic partnership.

## Currency

The Central Bank of Jordan commenced operations in 1964 and is the sole issuer
of Jordanian currency, the Jordanian dinar, which is pegged to the US dollar.
The following chart of the trend of gross domestic product of Jordan at market
prices by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of
Jordanian dinars.

Year | Gross domestic product  
(JD million) | $US exchange | Inflation index   
(2000=100)  
---|---|---|---  
1980 | 1,165 | 0.29 Jordanian dinars | 35   
1985 | 1,971 | 0.39 Jordanian dinars | 45   
1990 | 2,761 | 0.66 Jordanian dinars | 70   
1995 | 4,715 | 0.70 Jordanian dinars | 87   
2005 | 9,118 | 0.70 Jordanian dinars | 112   
  
For purchasing power parity comparisons, the Jordanian dinar is exchanged per
US dollar at 0.710.

Jordan's population is 6,342,948 and mean wages were $4.19 per man-hour in
2009.

## Economic overview

Jordan is classified by the UN as an "Upper-middle-income country." According
to the Heritage Foundation's Index of Economic Freedom, Jordan has the fourth
freest economy in the Middle East and North Africa, behind only Israel,
Bahrain and Qatar, and the 32nd freest in the world. Jordan ranked as having
the 35th best infrastructure in the world, according to the World Economic
Forum's Index of Economic Competitiveness. The Kingdom scored higher than many
of its peers in the Persian Gulf and Europe like Kuwait, Israel and Ireland.
The 2010 AOF Index of Globalization ranked Jordan as the most globalized
country in the Middle East and North Africa region. Jordan's banking sector is
classified as "highly developed" by the IMF along with the GCC economies and
Lebanon.

The official currency in Jordan is the Jordanian dinar and divides into 100
qirsh (also called piastres) or 1000 fils. Since 23 October 1995, the dinar
has been officially pegged to the IMF's special drawing rights (SDRs). In
practice, it is fixed at 1 US$ = 0.709 dinar, which translates to
approximately 1 dinar = 1.41044 dollars. The Central Bank buys US dollars at
0.708 dinar, and sell US dollars at 0.7125 dinar, Exchangers buys US dollars
at 0.708 and sell US dollars at 0.709.

In 2011, the Jordanian market was considered one of the most developed Arab
markets outside the Persian Gulf. Jordan ranked 18th on the 2012 Global Retail
Development Index which lists the 30 most attractive retail markets in the
world. Jordan was ranked as the 19th most expensive country in the world to
live in 2010 and the most expensive Arab country to live in.

Jordan has been a member of the World Trade Organization since 2000. In the
2009 Global Enabling Trade Report, Jordan ranked 4th in the Arab World behind
the UAE, Bahrain, and Qatar. The free trade agreement with the United States
that went into effect in December 2001 phased out duties on nearly all goods
and services by 2010.

### Unemployment

Jordan has high unemployment rates, 11.9% in the fourth quarter of 2010 but
some estimate it to be as high as a quarter of the working-age population.
Unemployment reached 25% in 2021, the highest level in more than 25 years, 6%
points more than in 2019, and more than double the amount in 2011.
Unemployment is a major issue, particularly for young people, women, and those
with a university degree, with rates of unemployment exceeding 45%, 30%, and
30%, respectively.

#### Youth unemployment

There are 15 million unemployed young men in Arab communities. The youth
unemployment rate in Jordan has traditionally been much higher than other
countries. In the past ten years, the rate has stayed around 23%. There has
been a recent increase in the popular belief that unemployment is the fault of
the individual and not a societal problem. However, youth unemployment has
also been attributed to increased pressure on service sectors that typically
employ more youth in Jordan. Youth unemployment has led to later and later
ages of marriage in Jordan, which some view as one of the most important
consequences of the phenomenon. Another consequence experienced in Jordan is
increased mental health problems. In 2019, the estimated youth unemployment
rate in Jordan was at 35%.

### Remittances to Jordan

The flows of remittance to Jordan experienced rapid growth, particularly in
the late 1970s and 1980s, when Jordan started exporting high skilled labour to
the Persian Gulf States. The money that migrants send home, remittances, is an
important source of external funding for many developing countries, including
Jordan. With about US$3000 million in remittances in 2010, Jordan was in 10th
place among developing countries according to World Bank data. Jordan has
ranked constantly among the top 20 remittances-recipient countries over the
last decade. In addition, the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF) statistics in 2010
indicate that Jordan was the third biggest recipient of remittances among Arab
countries after Egypt and Lebanon. The host countries that have absorbed most
of the Jordanian expatriates are Saudi Arabia and the United Arab of Emirates
(UAE), where the available recorded number of the Jordanian expatriates,
working abroad, indicates that about 90% of these migrants are working in
Persian Gulf countries.[_citation needed_] The proportion of skilled workers
in Jordan is among the highest in the region. Many of the world's major
software and hardware IT companies are present in Jordan. The presence of such
firms underlines Jordan's attractiveness as a stable base with high-calibre
human resources from which to serve the wider region. According to a report
published in January 2012 by the founder of venture capital firm Finaventures,
Rachid Sefraoui, Amman is one of the top 10 best cities in the world to launch
a tech start-up.

An estimated 13.3% of citizens live under the poverty line. Since the
mid-1970s, migrants' remittances are Jordan's most important source of foreign
exchange, and a decisive factor in the country's economic development and the
rising standard of living of the population.

Agriculture in Jordan constituted almost 40% of GNP in the early 1950s; on the
eve of the June 1967 War, it was 17%. By the mid-1980s, agriculture's share of
GNP in Jordan was only about 6%.

Jordan hosts SOFEX, the world's fastest growing and region's only special
operations and homeland security exhibition and conference. Jordan is a
regional and international provider of advanced military goods and services.
The KADDB Industrial Park, specialized in defense manufacturing, was opened in
September 2009 in Mafraq. By 2015, the park is expected to provide around
15,000 job opportunities whereas the investment volume is expected to reach
JD500 million. A report by Strategic Foresight Group has calculated the
opportunity cost of conflict for the Middle East from 1991 to 2010 at $12
trillion. Jordan's share in this is almost $84 billion.

Jordan has a 138% mobile phone penetration rate and a 63% internet penetration
rate. 41.6% of all mobile phones in Jordan are smartphones, compared with 40%
in the United States and 26% in the United Kingdom. 97% of Jordanian
households own at least one television set while 90% have satellite reception.
Furthermore, 61% of Jordanian households own at least one personal computer or
laptop.

According to an investment survey, Jordan ranked as the 9th best outsourcing
destination worldwide. Amman is one of the top 10 cities in the world to
launch a tech start-up in 2012 and is becoming referred to as the "Silicon
Valley of the Middle East".

Jordan has hosted the World Economic Forum on the Middle East and North Africa
six times and plans to hold it again at the Dead Sea for the seventh time in
2013. Amman also hosts the Mercedes Benz Fashion Week semiannually and is the
only city in the region to hold such a prestigious event that is usually held
by the likes of New York, Paris, and Milan.

### Standard of living

Jordan is one of the most liberal countries in the Middle East allowing a
debate to consider introducing a secular government. In the 2010 Human
Development Index, Jordan was placed in the "high human development" bracket
and came 7th among Arab countries, after the Persian Gulf states and Lebanon.
The 2010 Quality of Life Index prepared by _International Living_ magazine
ranked Jordan second in the MENA with 55.0 points after Israel.

Decades of political stability and security and strict law enforcement make
Jordan one of the top 10 countries worldwide in security. In the 2010 Newsweek
"World's Best Countries" list, Jordan ranked 53rd worldwide, and 3rd among
Arab countries after Kuwait and the UAE. Jordan is also among the top ten
countries whose citizens feel safest walking the streets at night.

As of 2011, 63% of working Jordanians are insured with the Social Security
Corporation, as well as 120,000 foreigners, with plans to include the rest of
Jordanian workers both inside and outside the kingdom as well as students,
housewives, business owners, and the unemployed. Only 1.6% of Jordanians make
less than $2 a day, one of the lowest in the developing world according to the
Human Poverty Index.

In the 2010 Gallup Global Wellbeing Survey, 30% of Jordanians described their
financial situation as "thriving", surpassed most of the Arab countries with
the exception of Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. In
2008, the Jordanian government launched the "Decent Housing for a Decent
Living" project aimed at building 120,000 affordable housing units within the
next 5 years, plus an additional 100,000 housing units if the need arises.

### Main indicators

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2024.

Year  | GDP (in bn. US$ PPP)  | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP)  | GDP (in bn. US$ nominal)  | GDP growth (real)  | Inflation (in percent)  | Government debt (in % of GDP)   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 8.82  | 3,978  | 3.93  | 11.1%  | 10.9%  | n/a   
1985  | 14.65  | 5,326  | 5.03  | −1.1%  | 2.8%  | n/a   
1990  | 16.83  | 4,834  | 4.19  | −1.6%  | 16.2%  | 227.5%   
1995  | 24.31  | 5,453  | 6.76  | 6.0%  | 2.4%  | 117.8%   
2000  | 31.00  | 6,131  | 8.73  | 4.2%  | 0.7%  | 99.3%   
2005  | 47.66  | 8,392  | 13.13  | 8.8%  | 3.5%  | 73.0%   
2006  | 53.31  | 8,774  | 15.80  | 8.5%  | 6.3%  | 66.3%   
2007  | 59.34  | 9,166  | 17.96  | 8.4%  | 4.7%  | 64.3%   
2008  | 64.95  | 9,792  | 22.65  | 7.4%  | 14.0%  | 54.2%   
2009  | 68.63  | 10,122  | 24.54  | 5.0%  | -0.7%  | 58.0%   
2010  | 71.07  | 10,254  | 27.13  | 2.3%  | 4.8%  | 59.4%   
2011  | 74.52  | 10,482  | 29.52  | 2.7%  | 4.2%  | 62.1%   
2012  | 77.76  | 10,782  | 31.68  | 2.4%  | 4.5%  | 70.5%   
2013  | 81.14  | 10,545  | 34.50  | 2.6%  | 4.8%  | 75.6%   
2014  | 85.35  | 9,858  | 36.90  | 3.4%  | 2.9%  | 75.0%   
2015  | 88.29  | 9,300  | 38.64  | 2.5%  | −0.9%  | 78.4%   
2016  | 90.91  | 9,123  | 39.95  | 2.0%  | −0.8%  | 77.4%   
2017  | 94.83  | 9,283  | 41.67  | 2.5%  | 3.3%  | 75.7%   
2018  | 94.60  | 9,045  | 43.43  | 1.9%  | 4.5%  | 74.3%   
2019  | 100.63  | 9,405  | 44.57  | 1.8%  | 0.8%  | 78.0%   
2020  | 104.08  | 9,524  | 43.76  | −1.1%  | 0.3%  | 88.0%   
2021  | 101.62  | 9,115  | 46.36  | 3.7%  | 1.3%  | 93.3%   
2022  | 111.51  | 9,880  | 48.72  | 2.4%  | 4.2%  | 93.0%   
2023  | 118.54  | 10,456  | 50.89  | 2.6%  | 2.1%  | 92.8%   
2024  | 124.28  | 10,917  | 53.31  | 2.4%  | 2.1%  | 91.7%   
  
## Industries

### Agriculture, forestry, and fishing

Despite increases in production, the agriculture sector's share of the economy
has declined steadily to just 2.4% of gross domestic product by 2004. About 4%
of Jordan's labor force worked in the agricultural sector in 2002. The most
profitable segment of Jordan's agriculture is fruit and vegetable production
(including tomatoes, cucumbers, citrus fruit, and bananas) in the Jordan
Valley. The rest of crop production, especially cereal production, remains
volatile because of the lack of consistent rainfall. Fishing and forestry are
negligible in terms of the overall domestic economy. The fishing industry is
evenly divided between live capture and aquaculture; the live weight catch
totaled just over 1,000 metric tons in 2002. The forestry industry is even
smaller in economic terms; approximately 240,000 total cubic meters of
roundwood were removed in 2002, the vast majority for fuelwood.

#### Recent Developments

Since gaining independence, Jordan's agricultural sector has experienced
significant growth, with the added value of its production reaching JD1.691
billion and registering a 9% growth rate. Vegetable production has increased
by 91%, and fruit tree produce has risen by 141%, expanding to meet both local
and international demand. Jordanian agricultural products now reach 112
countries, with exports rising by 441% to JD1.5 billion. Livestock numbers
have grown by 54%, totaling 3.8 million animals, and the value of animal
products has increased by 279% to JD1.305 billion. Employment in the sector
has grown by 38%, now encompassing 261,000 workers. The Agricultural Credit
Corporation's capital has expanded by 213% to JD100 million, providing JD55
million in annual loans to 11,000 farmers. These developments underscore the
sector's role in enhancing food security, economic integration, and job
creation in rural areas.

### Mining and minerals

Potash and phosphates are among the country's main economic exports. In 2003
approximately 2 million tons of potash salt production translated into US$192
million in export earnings, making it the second most lucrative exported good.
Potash production totaled 1.9 million tons in 2004 and 1.8 million tons in
2005. In 2004 approximately 6.75 million tons of phosphate rock production
generated US$135 million in export earnings, placing it fourth on Jordan's
principal export list. With production totaling 6.4 million tons in 2005,
Jordan was the world's third largest producer of raw phosphates. In addition
to these two major minerals, smaller quantities of unrefined salt, copper ore,
gypsum, manganese ore, and the mineral precursors to the production of
ceramics (glass sand, clays, and feldspar) are also mined.

### Industry and manufacturing

A recycling project situated a few kilometres outside Amman.

The industrial sector, which includes mining, manufacturing, construction, and
power, accounted for approximately 26% of gross domestic product in 2004
(including manufacturing 16.2%; construction 4.6%; and mining 3.1%). More than
21% of the country's labor force was reported to be employed in this sector in
2002. The main industrial products are potash, phosphates, pharmaceuticals,
cement, clothes, and fertilizers. The most promising segment of this sector is
construction. In the past several years, demand has increased rapidly for
housing and offices of foreign enterprises based in Jordan to better access
the Iraqi market. The manufacturing sector has grown as well (to nearly 20% of
GDP by 2005), in large part as a result of the United States–Jordan Free Trade
Agreement (ratified in 2001 by the U.S. Senate); the agreement has led to the
establishment of approximately 13 qualifying industrial zones throughout the
country. The zones, which provide duty-free access to the U.S. market, produce
mostly light industrial products, especially ready-made garments. By 2004 the
zones accounted for nearly US$1.1 billion in exports, according to the
Jordanian government.

Jordan's free trade agreement with the US – the first in the Arab world – has
already made the US one of Jordan's most significant markets. By 2010, it
would have barrier-free export access in almost all sectors. A number of trade
agreements with countries in the Middle Eastern and North African regions and
beyond should also reap increasing benefits, not in the least the Agadir
Agreement, which is seen as a precursor to a free trade agreement with the EU.
Jordan also recently[_when?_] signed a free trade agreement with Canada.
Furthermore, Jordan's plethora of industrial zones offering tax incentives,
low utility costs and improved infrastructure links are helping incubate new
developments. The relatively high skills level is also a key factor in
promoting investment and stimulating the economy, particularly in value-added
sectors. Despite the fact that Jordan has few natural resources it does
benefit from abundant reserves of potash and phosphates, which are widely used
in the production of fertilisers. Exports by these industries are expected to
have a combined worth of $1bn in 2008. Other important industries include
pharmaceuticals, which exported around $435m in 2006 and $260m in the first
half of 2008 alone, as well as textiles, which were worth $1.19bn in 2007.
Although the value of Jordan's industrial sector is high, the kingdom faces a
number of challenges. Because the country is dependent on importing raw
materials, it is vulnerable to price volatility. Shortages in water and power
also make consistent development difficult. Despite these challenges, Jordan's
economic openness and long-standing fertiliser and pharmaceutical industries
should continue to provide a solid source of foreign currency.

Jordan has a plethora of industrial zones and special economic zones aimed at
increasing exports and making Jordan an industrial giant. The Mafraq SEZ is
focused on industry and logistics hoping to become the regional logistics hub
with air, road, and rail links to neighboring countries and eventually Europe
and the Persian Gulf. The Ma'an SEZ is primarily industrial focusing on
satisfying domestic demand and reducing reliance on imports. With a national
rail system under construction, Jordan expects trade to grow significantly and
Jordan will mostly become the trade hub of the Levant and even the Middle East
region as a whole due to its geography and natural resources.

### Telecoms and IT

Telecommunications is a billion-dollar industry with estimates showing that
core markets of fixed-line, mobile and data service generate annual revenue of
around JD836.5m ($1.18bn) per year, which is equivalent to 13.5% of GDP.
Jordan's IT sector is the most developed and competitive in the region due to
the 2001 telecom liberalization. Market share of the mobile sector, the most
competitive telecoms market, is currently fairly evenly divided between the
three operators, with Zain, owned by MTC Kuwait, maintaining the largest share
(39%), followed by France Telecom's brand Orange (36%) and Umniah (25%), which
is 96% owned by Bahrain's Batelco. End of year figures for 2007 show that the
market trend is towards greater parity, with Zain's share falling in the space
of a year from 47% in 2006 and the other two operators picking up subscribers.
The increased competition has led to pricing that is more favourable to
consumers. Mobile penetration is currently around 80%.

Ambitious subsequent national strategies were formulated already since Y 2000
as a private sector initiative directly led by his majesty the king of Jordan.
Information technology association in Jordan (int@j ) was established to kick
off a private sector process that would focus on preparing Jordan for the new
economy through IT and shall reflect the national objectives towards
automation and modernization in co-operation with the ministry of information
technology in Jordan the (MOICT). The latest strategy will take the sector
through to 2011, aims to bring Jordan to precise objectives. The ICT sector
currently accounts for over a 14% (indirect) of the kingdom's GDP. This figure
includes foreign investment and total domestic revenue from the sector.
Employment growth in the sector was progressive and reached up to 60.000
(indirect ) by 2008. The government is working to address employment issues
and education related to sector by developing ICT training and opportunities
to increase the overall penetration of ICT in Jordanian society. The policy
outlines a number of objectives for the country to reach within the next three
years, including almost doubling the size of the sector to $3bn, and pushing
internet user penetration up to 50%.

The early founder of Int@j and its first chairman of the board is Karim Kawar
and early activists who drove the national strategic objectives and helped
formulate an action plan through the developing pillars were Marwan Juma
Jordan's minister of ICT, Doha Abdelkhaleq on labour and education. Humam
Mufti on advocacy and Nashat Masri on Capital and finance amongst others. Such
an infrastructure made Jordan a suitable location for IT startups that operate
in the fields of web development, mobile application development, online
services, and investment in IT businesses.

The IT industry in Jordan in the year 2000 and beyond got a very big boost
after the Gulf War of 1991. This boost came from a large influx of immigrants
from the Gulf countries to Jordan, mostly from Jordanian expatriates from
Kuwait, totaling few hundred thousands. This large wave impacted Jordan in
many ways, and one of them was on its IT industry.

### Energy

Energy remains perhaps the biggest challenge for continued growth for Jordan's
economy. Spurred by the surge in the price of oil to more than $145 a barrel
at its peak, the Jordanian government has responded with an ambitious plan for
the sector. The country's lack of domestic resources is being addressed via a
$14bn investment programme in the sector. The programme aims to reduce
reliance on imported products from the current level of 96%, with renewables
meeting 10% of energy demand by 2020 and nuclear energy meeting 60% of energy
needs by 2035. The government also announced in 2007 that it would scale back
subsidies in several areas, including energy, where there have historically
been regressive subsidies for fuel and electricity. In another new step, the
government is opening up the sector to competition, and intends to offer all
the planned new energy projects to international tender.

Unlike most of its neighbors, Jordan has no significant petroleum resources of
its own and is heavily dependent on oil imports to fulfill its domestic energy
needs. In 2002 proved oil reserves totaled only 445,000 barrels (70,700 m3).
Jordan produced only 40 barrels per day (6.4 m3/d) in 2004 but consumed an
estimated 103,000 barrels per day (16,400 m3/d). According to U.S. government
figures, oil imports had reached about 100,000 barrels per day (16,000 m3/d)
in 2004. The Iraq invasion of 2003 disrupted Jordan's primary oil supply route
from its eastern neighbor, which under Saddam Hussein had provided the kingdom
with highly discounted crude oil via overland truck routes. Since late 2003,
an alternative supply route by tanker through the Al Aqabah port has been
established; Saudi Arabia is now Jordan's primary source of imported oil;
Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) are secondary sources. Although not
so heavily discounted as Iraqi crude oil, supplies from Saudi Arabia and the
UAE are subsidized to some extent.

In the face of continued high oil costs, interest has increased in the
possibility of exploiting Jordan's vast oil shale resources, which are
estimated to total approximately 40 billion tons, 4 billion tons of which are
believed to be recoverable. Jordan's oil shale resources could produce 28
billion barrels (4.5 km3) of oil, enabling production of about 100,000 barrels
per day (16,000 m3/d). The oil shale in Jordan has the fourth largest in the
world which currently, there are several companies who are negotiating with
the Jordanian government about exploiting the oil shale like Royal Dutch
Shell, Petrobras and Eesti Energia.

Natural gas is increasingly being used to fulfill the country's domestic
energy needs, especially with regard to electricity generation. Jordan was
estimated to have only modest natural gas reserves (about 6 billion cubic
meters in 2002), but new estimates suggest a much higher total. In 2003 the
country produced and consumed an estimated 390 million cubic meters of natural
gas. The primary source is located in the eastern portion of the country at
the Risha gas field. Until the early 2010s, the country imported the bulk of
its natural gas via the Arab Gas Pipeline that stretches from the Al Arish
terminal in Egypt underwater to Al Aqabah and then to northern Jordan, where
it links to two major power stations. This Egypt–Jordan pipeline supplied
Jordan with approximately 1 billion cubic meters of natural gas per year. Gas
supplies from Egypt were halted in 2013 due to insurgent activities in the
Sinai and domestic gas shortages in Egypt. In light of this, a liquified
natural gas terminal was built in the Port of Aqaba to facilitate gas imports.
In 2017, a low-capacity gas pipeline from Israel was completed which supplies
the Arab Potash factories near the Dead Sea. As of 2018, a large capacity
pipeline from Israel is under construction in northern Jordan which is
expected to begin operating by 2020 and will supply the kingdom with 3 BCM of
gas per year, thereby satisfying most of Jordan's natural gas consumption
needs.

The state-owned National Electric Power Company (NEPCO) produces most of
Jordan's electricity (94%). Since mid-2000, privatization efforts have been
undertaken to increase independent power generation facilities; a Belgian firm
was set to begin operations at a new power plant near Amman with an estimated
capacity of 450 megawatts. Power plants at Az Zarqa (400 megawatts) and Al
Aqabah (650 MW) are Jordan's other primary electricity providers. As a whole,
the country consumed nearly 8 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity in 2003
while producing only 7.5 billion kWh of electricity. Electricity production in
2004 rose to 8.7 billion kWh, but production must continue to increase in
order to meet demand, which the government estimates would continue to grow by
about 5% per year. About 99% of the population is reported to have access to
electricity.

### Transport

The transportation sector on average contributes some 10% to Jordan's GDP,
with transportation and communications accounting for $2.14bn in 2007. Well
aware of the sector's importance to the country's service and industry-
oriented economy, in 2008 the government formulated a new national transport
strategy with the aim to improve, modernise and further privatise the sector.
With no imminent solution to the ongoing security crisis in Iraq in sight,
prospects for the Jordanian transport sector as a whole look bright. The
country will arguably remain one of the major transit points for both goods
and people destined for Iraq, while the number of tourists visiting Jordan is
set to continue to increase. The main events to follow in the near future are
the relocation of Aqaba's main port, a national railway system, and the
construction of a new terminal at QAIA. Volatility in fuel prices is almost
certainly going to have negative effects on operational costs and as such may
hamper the sector's average annual growth of around 6%. However, uncertain
fuel prices also offer a great deal of incentive to boost private investments
in alternative modes of transport such as public buses and improved trains.

### Media and advertising

Although the state remains a major influence, Jordan's media sector has seen
significant privatisation and liberalisation efforts in recent years. Based on
official rack rates, research firm Ipsos estimated that the advertisement
sector spent some $280m towards publicity in Jordan's media, 80% of which was
spent on newspapers, followed by TV, radio and magazines. The biggest event of
2007 was the cancelled launch of ATV, the kingdom's first private broadcaster.
As a result, the state-owned Jordan TV (JTV) remains the country's sole
broadcaster. In recent years, Jordan has also seen a spectacular rise in the
number of blogs, websites and news portals as sources of news information. The
increasing diversification of Jordan's media is a good sign and should boost
advertising revenues and private initiatives.

Recording growth of 30%, 2007 turned out to be yet another outstanding year
for Jordan's advertising industry. Following nearly a decade of double-digit
growth, however, most publicity specialists expect to see a relative slowdown
in 2008. Unlike 2007, no major campaigns were planned for the first part of
2008. Additionally, the Jordanian advertising had some catching up to do with
the rest of the region in terms of average expenditure per capita. As the
sector matures, it is only normal for growth figures to gradually decrease.
Since 2000 total ad spend increased from $77m to $280m in 2007, an increase of
260%. The Jordanian telecoms sector was the biggest ad spender in 2007,
accounting for around 20% of the market, followed by the banking and finance
sector (12%), services industry (11%), real estate (8%) and the automotive
sector (5%). In the next year, particularly if there is a downturn, it would
become increasingly important for the sector to develop good vocational
training and to begin to take advantage of new media markets.

### Services

Services accounted for more than 70% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2004.
The sector employed nearly 75% of the labor force in 2002.

Jordan's banking system consists of 25 commercial banks, three Islamic banks,
and nine foreign banks, with total assets of Jordanian dinar, JOD 57 billion
(or EUR69.6 billion). Between 2010 and 2020, the sector's total assets climbed
by 5% on average, led by a 7% increase in lending.

The banking sector is widely regarded as advanced in both regional and
international terms. In 2007, total profits of the 15 listed banks rose 14.89%
to JD640m ($909m). Jordan's strong growth of 6% in 2007 was reflected in a
20.57% expansion in net credit to JD17.9bn ($25.4bn) by the end of the year.
The most improvement was in trade, construction and industry. Many banks
suffered from the sharp correction in the Amman Stock Market in 2006,
encouraging them to focus on core banking business in 2007, and this was
reflected in a 16.65% rise in net interest and commission income to JD1.32bn
($1.87bn). The stock market also picked up in 2007 and total portfolio income
losses decreased. Although Jordan's banking sector is small by global
standards, it has attracted strong interest from regional investors in Lebanon
and the GCC. New regulations introduced by the CBJ, in addition to political
stability, have helped to create a favourable investment environment. Its
conservative policies helped Jordan avoid the 2008 financial crisis, Jordanian
banks was one of the only countries that posted a profit in 2009.

Banking sector profitability was momentarily impacted (in 2020) by the
COVID-19-induced economic downturn, but it already recovered to pre-COVID-19
levels in 2021. The Jordanian banking sector's non-performing loan (NPL) ratio
remained at 5.5% during the COVID-19 pandemic. According to a survey conducted
in 2021, the pandemic's impact on credit supply in Jordan has been quite
limited, with two-thirds of the banks surveyed indicating a constant or
growing availability of loans. 50% of banks also reported an increase to loan
supply for SMEs. For corporates, the increase was 25%.

90% of Banks believed that the pandemic will also affect the digitization of
internal processes. 81% believed that banks' daily operations will be impacted
and 90% believed that banks' online offerings will be improved.

Contributing an estimated JD477.5m ($678.05m), or 4.25% of Jordan's GDP,
according to figures from the Central Bank, the construction sector performed
strongly in 2007. The Great Amman Municipality (GAM) completed its master plan
for the capital, which is expected to grow from 700 km2 today to 1700 km2 by
2025. Amman is changing from a predominantly horizontal to a largely vertical
city due to various clusters of high-rises. Significant developments outside
Amman include the rapid residential build-up of Zarqa, the transformation of
Aqaba into a commercial and tourist centre, and the construction of a series
of high-end hotels and tourist resorts along the Dead Sea. A new airport
terminal, Amman ring road and a light rail between the capital and Zarqa are
being constructed.

Despite recording a relative slowdown compared to the expansion of recent
years, Jordan's construction and real estate market continued to grow in 2007.
Trading totaled JD5.6bn ($8bn), up from JD5.2bn ($7.4bn) in 2006, according to
Jordan's Land and Survey Department. Although the years of astounding
growth—some 75% in 2004 and 48% in 2005—seem to have passed, the future looks
bright for real estate, as demand continues to outstrip supply, while Jordan
remains a very attractive investment destination for foreign businesses,
second-home buyers and Jordanians working abroad. With Jordan's continuing
sharp population growth, as well as its strategic location at the heart of the
Middle East, the kingdom's main market drivers indicate a bright future for
years to come. Although a number of class-A office space developments are
currently under construction, it would take a few years to close the gap
between demand and supply. The Amman retail market may become more saturated
in the short term. Consequently, developers may turn to other cities to build
supermarkets and malls.

Jordan's insurance market, with 29 companies operating in a country of just
5.7 million people, is saturated, despite regulatory encouragements for
mergers and acquisitions. In terms of market share based on premiums, motor
coverage accounts for 42.4%, medical insurance 18.6%, fire and property damage
17%, life 9.8%, marine and transport 7.9% and other insurance the remaining
4.3%. The insurance sector made up 2.52% of GDP in 2006, up from 2.43% in
2005. Current plans call for increasing the sector's GDP contribution to 7% in
the short term and 10% in the long term. The sector holds great potential but
remains underdeveloped. Region-wide price increases and a lack of consumer
understanding of products are two major challenges. In addition, cultural
considerations, including religion, make improving market penetration
difficult. The cost of living has also risen, and the IMF forecasts that the
inflation rate would reach 9% in 2008. Salaries have remained unchanged,
however, leaving consumers with less disposable income. Other than mandatory
motor coverage, insurance products are considered a luxury by average
Jordanians, who must often prioritise spending. There would likely only be a
few changes to the market in the coming year. Members of the sector would like
to see greater coordination among the regulators and those working for the
kingdom's legal system in order to improve insurance laws.

### Tourism

The state of the tourism sector is widely regarded as below potential,
especially given the country's rich history, ancient ruins, Mediterranean
climate, and diverse geography. Despite personal appeals by the king and an
increasingly sophisticated marketing campaign, the industry is still adversely
affected by the political instability of the region. More than 5 million
visitors entered Jordan in 2004, generating US$1.3 billion in earnings.
Earnings from tourism rose to US$1.4 billion in 2005. The fact that the bulk
of Jordan's tourist trade emanates from elsewhere in the Middle East should
contribute to the industry's growth potential in the years ahead, as Jordan is
relatively stable, open, and safe in comparison to many of its neighbors. The
tourism sector remains an important element of the Jordanian economy, directly
employing some 30,000 Jordanians and contributing 10% to the kingdom's GDP.
Despite a decline in Arab and Gulf visitors, 2007 marked a year of steady
growth for the tourism sector. Revenues jumped 13% to nearly $2.11bn during
the first 11 months, up from $1.86bn for the same period in 2006. The sector
is overseen by the government's National Tourism Strategy (NTS), which was
established in 2004 to take the industry through 2010. NTS aimed to double
tourism revenues during the period and to increase tourism-related jobs to
91,719. The first goal has already been met but the second one might be more
of a challenge: between 2004 and 2007 the total number of people employed in
the sector rose from 23,544 to 35,484. This is impressive growth, but less
than half the 90,000-or-more goal. NTS hopes to place Jordan as a boutique
destination for high-end tourists. The strategy identifies seven priorities or
niche markets: cultural heritage (archaeology); religion; ecotourism; health
and wellness; adventure; meetings, incentives, conventions and exhibitions
(MICE); and cruises. The Jordan Tourism Board's (JTB) marketing budget has
increased in the past year from JD6m ($8.52m) to JD11.5m ($16.3m). These are
positive times for tourism in Jordan, with steady growth and major projects in
the pipeline. The sector has to make improvements in infrastructure and
marketing, but overall the industry has been improving for the past several
years.

Jordan's real GDP fell by 1.6% in 2020, with a dramatic reduction in tourism—a
crucial economic sector—being one of the primary transmission routes of the
crisis. Tourism provides for about 40% of Jordan's export receipts and 10–15%
of GDP, with 3.8 million international tourists every year. The sector's GDP
share fell to 3% in 2020, and the recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is
likely to be slow.

## External trade

Jordanian exports in 2006

Since 1995, economic growth has been low. Real GDP has grown at only about
1.5% annually, while the official unemployment has hovered at 14% (unofficial
estimates are double this number). The budget deficit and public debt have
remained high and continue to widen, yet during this period inflation has
remained low due mainly to stable monetary policy and the continued peg to the
United States Dollar. Exports of manufactured goods have risen at an annual
rate of 9%. Monetary stability has been reinforced, even when tensions were
renewed in the region during 1998, and during the illness and ultimate death
of King Hussein in 1999.

Expectations of increased trade and tourism as a consequence of Jordan's peace
treaty with Israel have been disappointing. Security-related restrictions to
trade with the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have led to a substantial decline
in Jordan's exports there. Following his ascension, King Abdullah improved
relations with Arabic states of the Persian Gulf and Syria, but this brought
few real economic benefits. Most recently the Jordanians have focused on WTO
membership and a Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. as means to encourage
export-led growth.

## Investment

The stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Jordan was valued at
$37.639 billion in 2005 by the World Bank.

## Salaries

According to the 2015 Middle East and North Africa Salary Survey conducted by
Bayt.com, Respondents from GCC (49%) seem somewhat happier with the raise they
received in 2014, as compared to respondents from Levant (42%):

## Aqaba Special Economic Zone

The population of Aqaba is only 100,000 people and is set to double over the
next 10 years. The town benefits from some natural advantages. Located at the
southern tip of the country, between Saudi Arabia and Israel on the shores of
the Red Sea, the city is close to the Suez Canal, with easy access to key
trade centres in both the Middle East and Africa. Aqaba is also the kingdom's
only deep-water port town, taking up most of Jordan's scant 27 km (17 mi) of
coastline. The Aqaba Special Economic Zone (ASEZ) has been responsible for
most of this development since it opened in 2001.

It covers 375 km2 and offers tax and tariff incentives, as well as full
repatriation rights and more flexible operating regulations. There is a 5%
flat tax on most economic activities, no tariffs on imported goods, no
currency restrictions and no property taxes for corporate land. Additionally –
and somewhat controversially, given Jordan's past issues with unemployment –
companies based in ASEZ are allowed to employ up to 70% foreign workers in
their operations. Jordan's investment profile has been growing nationally, but
according to the Jordan Investment Board (JIB), the ASEZ has exceeded
investment targets by 33%. By 2006 it had already brought in around $8bn in
investment, some $2bn more than the original target of $6bn by 2020. ASEZ
expects to attract a further $12bn spread across a number of sectors,
including tourism, finance and industry. The Development Law of 2008 set in
place a universal framework for special development areas based on the Aqaba
model.