The **economy of Peru** is an emerging, mixed economy characterized by a high
level of foreign trade and an upper middle income economy as classified by the
World Bank. Peru has the forty-seventh largest economy in the world by total
GDP and currently experiences a high human development index. The country was
one of the world's fastest-growing economies in 2012, with a GDP growth rate
of 6.3%. The economy was expected to increase 9.3% in 2021, in a rebound from
the COVID-19 pandemic in Peru. Peru has signed a number of free trade
agreements with its main trade partners. China became the nation's largest
trading partner following the China–Peru Free Trade Agreement signed on 28
April 2009. Additional free trade agreements have been signed with the United
States in 2006, Japan in 2011 and the European Union in 2012. Trade and
industry are centralized in Lima while agricultural exports have led to
regional development within the nation.

Peru's economy is dependent on commodity exports, making it vulnerable to
price volatility in international markets. The Government of Peru has
historically shown limited involvement in the public sector, as the economy
has often relied on commodity booms. The extraction of these commodities has
led to conflicts within the country due to their environmental and social
impacts.

Following the independence of Peru from the Spanish Empire, the economic elite
focused their power on the coastal regions through _centralismo_ , while the
rural provinces were governed by existing serfdom practices by _hacienda_
landowners. This model essentially continued until 1968 when General Juan
Velasco Alvarado took power, leading a dictatorship that increased social
spending and removing the power of landowners, which resulted with a power
vacuum in the 1970s that saw the rise of communist guerilla group Shining
Path. Beginning in the 1980s, Peru faced economic difficulties as a result of
the early 1980s recession and the internal conflict in Peru during its Lost
Decade. The government of Alan García enacted price controls that resulted in
hyperinflation. In response, the armed forces of Peru drafted Plan Verde, an
operation to create a neoliberal, open market economy. This was reportedly
executed by the government of Alberto Fujimori, beside prescriptions from
economist Hernando de Soto, during a period known as "Fujishock". During this
shock, price controls were discontinued, the privatization of state-run
organizations occurred and the promotion of foreign investments happened
through the removal of regulations. The economic measures of the Fujimori
administration made the country macro-economically stable.

Development in Peru increased following the 2000s commodities boom while
government finances, poverty reduction and progress in social sectors
improved. The nation has more recently adopted the Lima Consensus, an economic
ideology of neoliberalism, deregulation and free market policies that has made
foreign portfolio investment in Peru attractive. Inflation in 2012 was the
lowest in Latin America at 1.8%, with the most recent annual rate standing at
1.9% in 2020. Though statistical poverty has decreased significantly – from
nearly 60% in 2004 to 20.5% in 2018.

Peruvian economic performance has been tied to exports, which provide hard
currency to finance imports and external debt payments, though in recent
decades the economy has begun to diversify. Peru's main exports are copper,
gold, zinc, textiles, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, manufactures, machinery,
services and fish meal. The country's major trade partners are the United
States, China, Brazil, the European Union and Chile. Although exports have
provided substantial revenue, self-sustained growth and a more egalitarian
distribution of income have proven elusive. Services account for 59.9% of
Peruvian gross domestic product, followed by industry (32.7%) and agriculture
(7.6%). Recent economic growth has been fueled by macroeconomic stability,
improved terms of trade, as well as rising investment and consumption.

## History

Historic GDP per capita in Peru

### Inca Empire

The Tahuantinsuyo (the _Realm of the Four Parts_), popularly known as the Inca
Empire, was the largest civilization that emerged from the highlands of Peru
in the early 13th century. The Spanish conquered the last Inca stronghold in
1572.

The Inca Empire employed central planning. Writing about the Inca tax system,
Spanish chronicler Pedro Cieza de León said "the system the Incas employed was
so good that the people did not feel it, and prospered ... [A]ll this was
accomplished in such orderly fashion that neither did the natives fail to pay
what they owed and were assessed, nor did those who collected these tributes
venture to take one grain of corn in excess". Officials would travel to cities
and provinces where they would be provided quipus storing data, with Inca
territories contributing what was possible; whether it be labor (_mit'a_),
textiles, food, weapons or construction materials. Regarding labor, provinces
would provide men to be employed by the empire who required to be married so
their wives could maintain home life. Citizens were not exposed to overwork as
individuals who became ill would be returned and replaced by their home
province while many days of a month were dedicated to recreation and feasts.

### Viceroyalty of Peru

_Bozal_ African in Lima, 1805

The economy of the Viceroyalty of Peru largely depended on the export of
silver. The huge amounts of silver exported from the Viceroyalty of Peru and
Mexico deeply affected Europe, where some scholars believe it caused the so-
called price revolution. Silver mining was carried out using contract and free
wage labourers, as well as the _encomienda_ system of slavery. The
_encomienda_ has been described as constituting genocide. Under the Spanish
system, Cieza de León wrote that "with the disorder and greed of the
Spaniards, the number of the people has fallen off to such a degree that most
of them have disappeared, and they will be wiped out completely as a result of
the covetousness and greed". Afro-Peruvians also appeared as a result of
slavery in colonial Spanish America. Silver production peaked in 1610.

Prussian explorer Alexander von Humboldt first encountered guano in 1802 and
started fertilizer research Callao in Peru, with his findings being reported
throughout Europe.

### 19th century

#### Guano Era

The Chincha Islands, a large source of guano, 1866

After winning independence from Spain on 28 July 1821, Peru was financially
strapped. Additionally, the economy suffered from the collapse of the silver
mines. However, the guano trade with Europe, beginning in the 1840s, flooded
Peru with European investments and money. In 1840, Peruvian politician and
entrepreneur Francisco Quirós y Ampudia commercialized guano exports in a deal
with French businessmen and the Peruvian government, abolishing existing
claims to Peruvian guano. Guano was essentially nationalized and became Peru's
largest revenue source. Despite the near exhaustion of guano, Peru achieved
its greatest ever export of guano in 1870, with more than 700,000 tonnes
(770,000 short tons).

#### War of the Pacific

Chile was devastated by the Long Depression economic crisis of the 1870s and
began looking for a replacement for its silver, copper and wheat exports. It
has been argued that Chile's economic situation and the prospect of new wealth
in nitrates were the true reasons for the Chilean elite to go to war against
Peru and Bolivia, with most historians agreeing that the Chilean government's
expansionist foreign policy and its ambitions to control Atacama's mineral
wealth led to the conflict .

Chile won the war and with the Treaty of Ancón of 1884, the War of the Pacific
ended. Chile obtained half of Peru's guano income from the 1880s and its guano
islands, with Chile taking control over the most valuable nitrogen resources
in the world. Chile's national treasury would increase 900% from 1879 to 1902
due to the newly acquired lands. Meanwhile, Peru's reliance on commodity
exports – which continued through its history – resulted the bankruptcy of its
economy. Peru would go on to approve the Grace Contract, which granted
ownership of Peru's railroads to holders of sovereign debt, with the Peruvian
government not issuing new sovereign debt until 1906.

### 20th century

#### Amazon rubber boom

Into the twentieth century, Anglo-Peruvian Amazon Rubber Co in Iquitos began
to market rubber internationally. The rubber boom brought regions of Amazonia
into the international market. The Government of Peru ceded to the Anglo-
Peruvian Amazon Rubber Co the Amazon territories north of Loreto, after the
company's founder Julio César Arana purchased the land. During the rubber boom
the Putumayo Genocide was committed by Anglo-Peruvian Amazon Rubber Co.
Between 40,000 and 250,000 indigenous peoples were killed, with many being
sent to labor camps; ninety percent of the affected Amazonian populations were
annihilated.

#### World War I and II eras

In the early 1910s, Peru enjoyed a growing economy due to mining and crop
production, with a working class developing at the time. Following the
outbreak of World War I, international markets became turbulent and Peru
experienced a recession and a series of coups occurred through the mid and
late-1910s. Augusto B. Leguía, a member of Peru's oligarchy, then took power
through a coup and essentially assumed dictatorial powers, writing a new
constitution; Leguía would often ignore the constitution through his acts,
however. Víctor Raúl Haya de la Torre founded the American Popular
Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) calling for reforms, though Leguía quickly
banned the party. Leguía increased spending to modernize Peru, though this
also raised national debt and with the addition of the Great Depression in
1929, he was overthrown soon-after in 1930 by Luis Miguel Sánchez Cerro.

Sánchez announced a debt moratorium on US$180 million and Peru was banned from
markets in the United States as a result. The Sánchez government also
continued the repression of APRA, resulting in an Aprista party member
assassinating Sánchez. Óscar R. Benavides was chosen by the constituent
assembly to finish Sánchez's term and intensified persecution of left-wing
groups, resulting in increased support for the Peruvian Communist Party (PCP)
among indigenous and labor groups. As Peru's economy grew, a banker in Lima,
Manuel Prado Ugarteche, was elected into the presidency in the 1939 Peruvian
general election.

President Prado adopted a softer tone on APRA while Aprista leader Haya de la
Torre also espoused more moderate policy and support for foreign markets. APRA
was made a legal party in 1945 and in José Luis Bustamante y Rivero was
elected the same year, making an Aprista politician the Minister of the
Economy. Subsequently, the Bustamante greatly increasedeconomic
interventionism to include price controls and a foreign exchange controls,
which appeared beside a slowing economy, resulting in increased inflation.

#### Military _juntas_ and first Belaúnde government

Over the next two decades, military _juntas_ controlled Peru. On 29 October
1948, General Manuel A. Odría led a successful military coup against
Bustamante and assumes the presidency until 1956. Odría's government
experienced a growing economy due to a commodity boom, though many of the
government's investments remained in coastal cities while unrest increased
among interior and Andean regions that remained impoverished. Haya de la Torre
– whose APRA party had drifted even more to right-wing politics at this time –
won the 1962 Peruvian general election against Fernando Belaúnde, founder of
the right-wing Popular Action, though Haya de la Torre was unable to take
office due to a military coup opposed to APRA.

After a brief military government, Belaúnde won the 1963 Peruvian general
election, with his government making modest improvements by increasing
industrialization and constructing highways into the Andes. Belaúnde held a
doctrine called "_The Conquest of Peru by Peruvians_ ", which promoted the
exploitation of resources in the Amazon and other outlying areas of Peru
through conquest. In one 1964 incident called the Matsé genocide, the Belaúnde
administration targeted the Matsés after two loggers were killed, with the
Peruvian armed forces and American fighter planes dropping napalm on the
indigenous groups armed with bows and arrows, killing hundreds. Belaúnde's
economic measures were received with disapproval from rural and peasant
Peruvians. His government's reliance on resource exports, especially with the
fishing industry, resulted in increased inflation and a growing deficit. Amid
this conflict, general Juan Velasco Alvarado overthrows the Belaúnde in the
1968 Peruvian coup d'état .

#### Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces

Velasco established the Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces and it
adopted a state capitalism economic policy amid a period of economic
expansion. The government immediately instituted land reform initiatives,
establishing one of the most ambitious land tenure projects in the history of
Latin America. The land reform projects removed the traditional _hacienda_
system that resembled landowners imposing a serfdom on peasants and replaced
it with agricultural cooperatives called Agricultural Social-Interest
Societies (SAIS). The Velasco government took a structural approach; it
invested in infrastructure and began a widespread nationalization campaign of
key economic production sectors, education and the media. A fixed exchange
rate system was adopted and the national debt began to increase dramatically.
A combination of debt, inflation and the 1973 oil crisis induced an economic
crisis in the Velasco government, with General Francisco Morales-Bermúdez
overthrowing Velasco in the Tacnazo.

Bermúdez in name led the Second Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces,
with his government introducing austerity measures and removing state
capitalist systems. This government began monetary adjustment and started with
negotiations on foreign debt. However, corruption scandals and widespread
protests broke out and the military government agreed to transition Peru back
into a democratic political system.

#### The Lost Decade

In 1980, after twelve years of military rule, Fernando Belaúnde Terry was
elected president for a second time. On the day of the election, Shining Path
launched its armed struggle in Chuschi with a ballot burning incident,
essentially beginning the internal conflict in Peru. Belaúnde's used a
floating exchange rate and used populist policies, primarily relying on key
exports. His government continued to reverse Velasco's existing policies and
some economic liberalization. However, Belaúnde's government could not develop
a monetary policy, failed at managing state-run entities and faced a growing
external debt, leaving Peru in a vulnerable state.

Alan García was elected president in the 1985 Peruvian general election and
the first Aprista president in over sixty years. His administration adopted a
neo-structuralist economic policy, with the government funding the private
sector to enhance economic performance, increasing welfare spending and
instituting price controls; this resulted with temporary economic growth,
though Peru's national debt grew dramatically. By 1989, inflation reached
almost 3,000 percent and 7,000 percent in 1990, with Peru experiencing a GDP
loss of twenty-four percent in the last three years of García's tenure. With
the growing economic crisis and the terrorist Shining Path gaining territory
in an armed conflict with the Peruvian government, the idea of a leader with a
"heavy hand" became more attractive to Peruvians according to Gutiérrez Sanín
and Schönwälder.

The Peruvian armed forces grew frustrated with the inability of the García
administration to handle the nation's crises and began to draft a plan to
overthrow his government. According to Peruvian sociologist and political
analyst Fernando Rospigliosi, Peru's business elites held relationships with
the military planners, with Rospigliosi writing that businesses "probably
provided the economic ideas which [the military] agreed with, the necessity of
a liberal economic program as well as the installment of an authoritarian
government which would impose order". Thus, Plan Verde was drafted at the end
of the García presidency; the objectives evolved into establishing a civilian-
military government with a neoliberal economic policy.

#### Fujimori government

During his campaigning for the 1990 election, Alberto Fujimori expressed
concern against the proposed neoliberal policies of his opponent Mario Vargas
Llosa. Peruvian magazine _Oiga_ reported that following the election, the
armed forces were unsure of Fujimori's willingness to fulfill their objectives
outlined in Plan Verde and it was reported that the meeting held a negotiatory
meeting with him to ensure that Fujimori followed their direction. After
taking office, Fujimori abandoned the economic platform he promoted during his
campaign, adopting more aggressive neoliberal policies than those espoused by
Vargas Llosa, his competitor in the election. Fujimori would go on to adopt
many of the policies outlined in Plan Verde. Fujimori ultimately served as
president from 28 July 1990 to 17 November 2000.

Fujimori is often credited with defeating the Shining Path terrorist group in
Peru and restoring its macroeconomic stability. Fujimori's economic policy was
largely adopted from the advice of Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto, who
prescribed economic guidelines – including the loosening of economic
regulation, the introduction of austerity measures and the use of neoliberal
policies – that were ultimately adopted by the Fujimori administration and
established in the 1993 Constitution of Peru. Although economic statistics
show improved economic data in Peru in recent decades, the wealth earned
between 1990 and 2020 was not distributed throughout the country; living
standards showed disparities between the more-developed capital city of Lima
and similar coastal regions while rural provinces remained impoverished.

### 21st century

Peru bonds

30 year

20 year

15 year

10 year

5 year

2 year

#### Lima Consensus

Initially established by the Fujimori administration, the Lima Consensus
focused on deregulation and privatization with the goal of establishing a
neoliberal economy, all while limiting the involvement of the government in
the public sector. As the Washington Consensus lost popularity in the 2000s, a
more defined Lima Consensus began to emerge in Peru as the economy
simultaneously improved during the 2000s commodities boom. While Latin
American governments invested into social programs for education, healthcare
and poverty programs in the early 21st century, Peru under the Consensus chose
to cut social programs. President Alejandro Toledo continued to promote the
decentralization of Peru, while the former social democrat Alan García took
implementation of the consensus even further, adopting policies similar to
Augusto Pinochet. Keiko Fujimori, the daughter of Alberto Fujimori, has been a
major proponent for the Lima Consensus, using the support of neoliberal
economist Hernando de Soto to support her position during her elections. This
lack of state intervention as promoted by the Consensus has resulted with a
weak government with poor performance, with many Peruvians experiencing
insufficient basic services such as education, justice and security while
corruption, crime, crony capitalism and economic inequality increased as many
political officials frequently moving between business and government
positions without oversight.

Following the 2021 Peruvian general election that saw lefitst candidate Pedro
Castillo elected into the presidency, Fitch Solutions warned that his election
posed "substantial risks to the 'Lima Consensus', the investor-friendly
economic policy framework that has persisted over the last 20 years".

## Sectors

Peru's economic activity in the 1970s

### Agriculture

Peru is a country with many climates and geographical zones that make it a
very important agricultural nation. Peruvian agricultural exports are highly
appreciated and include artichokes, grapes, avocados, mangoes, peppers,
sugarcane, organic coffee and premium-quality cotton.

Peru is one of the 5 largest producers of avocado, blueberry, artichoke and
asparagus, one of the 10 largest producers in the world of coffee and cocoa,
one of the 15 largest producers in the world of potato and pineapple, and also
has a considerable production of grape, sugarcane, rice, banana, maize and
cassava; its agriculture is considerably diversified.

In 2018, Peru produced 10.3 million tons of sugarcane, 5.1 million tons of
potato, 3.5 million tons of rice, 2.2 million tons of banana, 1.5 million tons
of maize, 1.2 million tons of cassava, 921 thousand tons of palm oil, 645
thousand tons of grape, 548 thousand tons of pineapple, 504 thousand tons of
avocado, 481 thousand tons of tangerine, 502 thousand tons of orange, 369
thousand tons of coffee, 383 thousand tons of mango, 360 thousand tons of
asparagus, 270 thousand tons of lemon, 252 thousand tons of tomato, 207
thousand tons of barley, 195 thousand tons of wheat, 188 thousand tons of
olives, 187 thousand tons of carrots, 175 thousand tons of papaya, 175
thousand tons of pepper, 154 thousand tons of artichoke, 140 thousand tons of
apple, 134 thousand tons of cocoa, in addition to smaller productions of other
agricultural products.

#### Industry and services

#### Extraction

Natural gas separation plant of the Camisea Gas Project in La Convención
Province, Cuzco. Fishing fleet in Ferrol Bay near Chimbote. In the middle of
the 20th century, its port became the one with the largest fishing production
on the planet.

Fishing: Peru is an international leader in fishing, producing nearly 10
percent of the world's fish catch.

Mining is a major pillar of the Peruvian economy. In 2019, the country was the
2nd largest world producer of copper and silver, 8th largest world producer of
gold, 3rd largest world producer of lead, 2nd largest world producer of zinc,
4th largest world producer of tin, 5th largest world producer of boron and 4th
largest world producer of molybdenum. The country was once the world's largest
producer of silver and was also one of the five largest gold producers in the
world.

Illegal mining remains a significant problem in Peru with its associated
deforestation, pollution, prostitution, poor working conditions and
criminality.

#### Manufacturing

Peru has developed a medium manufacturing sector. The sector now represents 23
percent of GDP and is tied heavily to mining, fishing, agriculture,
construction and textiles. Manufacturing is mainly devoted to processing to
gain a value-added advantage. The most promising sector is textiles, metal
mechanics, food industry, agricultural industry, manufactures, chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, machinery and services.

#### Services

Tourism has represented a new growth industry in Peru since the early 1990s,
with the government and private sector dedicating considerable energies to
boosting the country's tourist destinations both to Peruvians and foreigners.

### Natural resources

Peru's natural resources are copper, silver, gold, timber, fish, iron ore,
coal, phosphate, potash, and natural gas.

## External trade and investment

### Foreign investment and balance of payments

#### Foreign trade and balance of payments

In 2001 the current account deficit dropped to about 2.2% of GDP (US$1.17
billion)--from 3.1% in 2000—while the trade balance registered a small
deficit. Exports dropped slightly to $7.11 billion, while imports fell 2.1% to
$7.20 billion. After being hit hard by El Niño in 1998, fisheries exports have
recovered, and minerals and metals exports recorded large gains in 2001 and
2002, mostly as a result of the opening of the Antamina copper-zinc mine. By
mid-2002, most sectors of the economy were showing gains. After several years
of substantial growth, foreign direct investment not related to privatization
fell dramatically in 2000 and 2001, as well as in the first half of 2002. Net
international reserves at the end of May 2002 stood at $9.16 billion, up from
$8.6 billion (2001), $17 billion at the end of 2006, over $20 billion in 2007,
and over $35 billion in May 2008. Peru has signed a number of free trade
agreements, including the 2007 United States-Peru Trade Promotion Agreement,
and agreements with Chile, Canada, Singapore, Thailand and China. Under
President Alan Garcia administration Peru achieved a bilateral trade agreement
with U.S. since 2010 to improve exports for its country and reach in August
2011 its pick in exports of more than 4,700 MM.

#### Foreign investment

The Port of Callao is Peru's gateway for exports and imports

The Peruvian government actively seeks to attract both foreign and domestic
investment in all sectors of the economy. International investment was spurred
by the significant progress Peru made during the 1990s toward economic,
social, and political stability, but it slowed again after the government
delayed privatizations and as political uncertainty increased in 2000.
President Alejandro Toledo has made investment promotion a priority of his
government. While Peru was previously marked by terrorism, hyperinflation, and
government intervention in the economy, the Government of Peru under former
President Alberto Fujimori took the steps necessary to bring those problems
under control. Democratic institutions, however, and especially the judiciary,
remain weak.

The Government of Peru's economic stabilization and liberalization program
lowered trade barriers, eliminated restrictions on capital flows, and opened
the economy to foreign investment, with the result that Peru now has one of
the most open investment regimes in the world. Between 1992 and 2001, Peru
attracted almost $17 billion in foreign direct investment, after negligible
investment until 1991, mainly from Spain (32.35%), the United States (17.51%),
Switzerland (6.99%), Chile (6.63%), and Mexico (5.53%). The basic legal
structure for foreign investment in Peru is formed by the 1993 constitution,
the Private Investment Growth Law, and the November 1996 Investment Promotion
Law. Although Peru does not have a bilateral investment treaty with the United
States, it has signed an agreement (1993) with the Overseas Private Investment
Corporation (OPIC) concerning OPIC-financed loans, guarantees, and
investments. Peru also has committed itself to arbitration of investment
disputes under the auspices of ICSID (the World Bank'sInternational Center for
the Settlement of Investment Disputes) or other international or national
arbitration tribunals.

## Currency

The sol is the currency of Peru. The exchange rate as of January 2025 is 3.76
soles to the US dollar. It was instated in 1991, when the Peruvian government
abandoned the inti due to hyperinflation of the currency; the sol has since
maintained the lowest inflation rate in Latin America. The sol replaced the
inti at a rate of 1 nuevo sol = 1,000,000 intis. The inti itself replaced
another inflated currency, the sol, which was used between 1863 and 1985. The
name _sol_ comes from the Latin _solidus_ , and is also the Spanish word for
"sun", which the ancient Inca civilization worshiped as the god Inti.

The sol currently enjoys a low inflation rate of 2.5%. Since it was put into
use, the sol's exchange rate with the United States dollar has stayed mostly
between 2.80 and 3.30 to 1. Out of all the currencies of the Latin American
region, the sol is the most stable and reliable, being the least affected by
the downturn in the value of the US dollar; during late 2007 and early 2008,
the exchange rate fell to 2.69 to 1, which had not been seen since 1997. The
exchange rate is set on a daily basis by the _Banco Central de Reserva del
Perú_ (Central Reserve Bank of Peru).

The sol is divided into 100 céntimos. The highest-denomination banknote is the
200 soles note; the lowest-denomination coin is the rarely used 5 céntimos
coin.

## Income and consumption

Peru divides its population into five socio-economic classes, A-E, with A
representing the rich; B, the upper middle class; C, the middle class; D, the
working class and low income families; and E, the marginalized poor. In 2018,
the segments were described as "crude" by Miguel Planas of the Ministry of
Finance due to the complicated structure of the society in Peru, where some
classes make money off of illegal trade which aren't counted in the GDP, and
are thus falsely classified as low income or marginalised poor families.

## Employment

Unemployment in Greater Lima is 5.6%, while for the rest of Peru is 7%. FY
2012–2013 In the last report, the number of workers by participants belonging
to the public sector amounted to 1.45 million.

## Economic trends

### Greater depth

The Lima Stock Exchange

From 1994 through 1998, under the government of Alberto Fujimori, the economy
recorded robust growth driven by foreign direct investment, almost 46% of
which was related to the privatization program. The government invested
heavily on the country's infrastructure, which became a solid foundation for
the future of the Peruvian economy.[_citation needed_] The economy stagnated
from 1998 through 2001, the result of the century's strongest El Niño weather
phenomenon, global financial turmoil, political instability, a stalled
privatization program, increased government intervention in markets[_citation
needed_], and worsening terms of trade. President Alejandro Toledo implemented
a recovery program after taking office, maintained largely orthodox economic
policies, and took measures to attract investment, including restarting the
privatization program. Nonetheless, political uncertainty led to GDP growth of
0.2% in 2001.[_citation needed_] The Lima Stock Exchange general index fell
34.5% in 2000 and 0.2% in 2001.[_citation needed_] Inflation remained at
record lows, registering 3.7% in 2000.[_citation needed_]

The year 2001 saw deflation of 0.1%. The government's overall budget deficit
rose sharply in 1999 and 2000 to 3.2% of GDP, the result of hikes in
government salaries, expenditures related to the 2000 election campaign,
higher foreign debt service payments, and lower tax revenues.[_citation
needed_] The government brought the deficit down to 2.5% of GDP in 2001, and
set a target of 1.9% of GDP for 2002. Peru's stability brought about a
substantial reduction in underemployment, from an average of 74% from the late
1980s through 1994 to 43% in the 1995–96 period, but the rates began climbing
again in 1997–2002 to over half the working population. The poverty rate
remained at 54% in 2001, with 24% of Peruvians living in extreme poverty. In
2005, 18% of Peruvians were living in extreme poverty and a poverty rate at
39%. As of 2010, around 30% of its total population is poor.

### Outlook

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( October 2011)_  
---|---  
  
The virtues of today's new multi-polar world for Peru are many. At 30 million
people, Peru is neither too small to matter nor so big it is going to be a
power in its own right. Midsized states, benefits from a world where it is no
longer mandatory to pick a big-power patron.

With expanding ports loading up boats to China on one side, and a new
superhighway to Brazil on the other, along with a free trade agreement with
the United States in its hip pocket, Peru seems well-positioned to prosper in
the coming years. But former President Toledo may not be hyperbolic when he
worries the future stability of the state may depend on its willingness to
distribute wealth more evenly.

Forecasts for the medium- and long-term remain highly positive. Peru's real
GDP growth in 2007 was (8.3%) and largest in Latin America in 2008 was an
outstanding 9.8%, the highest in the world. Inflation remained low, at about
3%, while the budget surplus is expected to remain at about 1% of
GDP.[_citation needed_] Private investment should keep growing at a rate of
15% a year.[_citation needed_] Exports and imports are expected to keep
rising.[_citation needed_] The unemployment and underemployment indexes (5.2%
and 34%, respectively, in Lima) should keep coming down as the economy
grows[_citation needed_], other cities in Peru like Cajamarca, Ica, Cuzco and
Trujillo are starting to show less unemployment nowadays.[_citation needed_]
The country is likely to attract future domestic and foreign investment in
tourism, agriculture, mining, petroleum and natural gas, power industries and
financial institutions. According to the IMF and the World Bank, Peruvian GDP
economic growth between 2007 and 2013 was:

In 2007 at 8.9%, in 2008 at 9.7%, in 2009 at 0.9%, in 2010 at 8.6%, in 2011 at
6.0%, in 2012 at 6,3% and in 2013 at 5.3%.

Therefore, Peruvian GDP grew in the 2007–2013 6 years period an outstanding
net growth of 45.7% or a 7.61% yearly average. The IMF forecast for Peru's
economic growth for the next 6 years 2013–2019 is a 7% yearly growth.

In FY 2011 for the first time since 1991 the size of the Peruvian economy
surpassed the Chilean economy. Peru now is the fifth major economy in South
America and is expected to become the fourth South American economy in 2018 by
surpassing Venezuela.

Private investment reached 25% of the GDP in 2007, and has remained stable
through 2010; and inflation is under control at an average 2% per year for the
next 5 years. International Debt will reach 25% of the GDP by 2010, down from
35% in 2006, and will be only 12% of the GDP by 2015.[_citation needed_] The
International Monetary Reserves of the National Reserve Bank (Dollar, Euro,
Yen, Gold, and other currencies) reached US$27 billion by the end of 2007, and
US$31 billion at the end of 2008. Currently reserves are at a US$73 billion
level for end of FY 2013, which more than doubles the total foreign debt of
Peru which is US$30 billion at the end of FY 2013.

Exports are growing at a pace of 25% and reached US$28 billion at the end of
2007 and US$30 billion at the end of 2010. In FY 2012 Peruvian exports reached
a total of US$46 billion.

High technological investment is growing fast in Peru, and will be 10% of the
GDP by 2010.[_citation needed_]

### Narcotics

#### Background

Coca has a long history of cultivation in the Andes, and has always been a
traditional part of Peruvian life. However, the narcotic properties of coca
were known only locally until 1786, when Lamarck listed the leaf in his
botanical encyclopedia. After the arrival of the Spanish, coca cultivation
increased and its use became more common and widespread. Since 1543, coca has
been internationally recognized for its trading value, and regulations imposed
upon it have attached increasing economic importance to the plant. Exchange of
the coca leaf between consumers in the highlands and growers in the low-lying
hills has gone on for at least the last millennium, strengthening local
economic ties. Between 1884 and 1900, coca and cocaine grew in popularity for
medical purposes and mass consumption in the United States. From 1905 to 1922,
anti-cocaine sentiments in the US resulted in criminalization of both coca and
cocaine. It was not until the 1920s that US diplomats began to extend drug
prohibitions internationally.

#### Current trends

The Peruvian coca and cocaine industry is as huge as it is today because of
advanced industrial nations’ demand for drugs. This high demand has created a
framework of dependence on "coca-dollars" and on US drug policy. Money from
cocaine trafficking feeds local economies, supports inflation, and even causes
social changes such as cocaine smoking among indigenous Peruvians. Coca
farming today is still a significant source of income for peasants, as it
accounts for 48% of total net family income in the high coca-growing Apurímac
River region. In an effort to reduce drug use in America, for the past 50
years the US government together with the United Nations have been waging a
war on drugs. The US Drug Control Program maintains that "eliminating the
cultivation of illicit coca and opium is the best approach to combating
cocaine and heroin availability in the US."

With US government cooperation, the Peruvian Government installed the National
Plan for the Prevention and Control of Drugs in 1995. This government
prohibition of narcotics trafficking in Peru has resulted in a 70% reduction
of coca leaf cultivation since 1995. However the reduction in cultivation may
not have actual effects on cocaine production, as recent advances in coca
growing and more efficient processing methods allow for greater cocaine yield.
The size of the narcotics industry as a part of the national economy is
difficult to measure, but estimates range from $300–$600 million. An estimated
200,000 Peruvian households have economies based on the production, refining,
or distribution of coca. Many economists believe that large flows of dollars
into the banking system contribute to the traditional depression of the dollar
exchange rate vis-a-vis the sol. The Central Bank engages in open market
activities to prevent the price of the sol from rising to levels that would
cause Peruvian exports to become prohibitively expensive.

Hurt economically by Peruvian Air Force interdiction efforts in the mid-1990s,
drug traffickers are now using land and river routes as well as aircraft to
transport cocaine paste and, increasingly, refined cocaine to consumers around
and out of the country. The Air Bridge Denial Program was suspended in April
2001 after the Peruvian Air Force and strength of the U.S. DEA misidentified a
civilian aircraft as a drug trafficker and shot it down, killing two American
citizens on board. Peru continues to arrest drug traffickers and seize drugs
and precursor chemicals, destroy coca labs, disable clandestine airstrips, and
prosecute officials involved in narcotics corruption.

Working with limited aid of the U.S. Agency for International Development
(USAID), the Peruvian Government carries out alternative development programs
in the leading coca-growing areas in an effort to convince coca farmers not to
grow that crop. Although the government previously eradicated only coca seed
beds, in 1998 and 1999 it began to eradicate mature coca being grown in
national parks and elsewhere in the main coca growing valleys. In 1999 the
government eradicated more than 150 km2 of coca; this figure declined to 65
km2 in 2000, due largely to political instability. The government agency
"Contradrogas", founded in 1996, facilitates coordination among Peruvian
Government agencies working on counter-narcotics issues. Alternative crops,
however, are not economically comparable to coca. 2004 prices indicate an
annual income per hectare of $600 for coffee and $1000 for cocoa, versus up to
$7500 for a hectare of coca.

For the global push towards a green economy, sustainability depends on access
to minerals such as copper, lithium, and rare earth elements. Peru, as one of
the most resource-rich nations in the world, plays an important role. Peru is
currently considered the world’s second-largest exporter of minerals such as
copper, silver, zinc, and lithium; these minerals are essential to the
technologies that drive change in industry to a cleaner and more sustainable
future. This year, in August 2024, Peru and the United States signed a
memorandum of understanding (MOU) for greater foreign direct investment (FDI)
and shared technological innovation. The MOU represents Peru as the US supply
for the accessibility of essential minerals, guaranteeing responsible
extraction processes. Peru has more than 6 t of lithium and managed 31 active
copper projects with almost US$40 billion in potential investments. Thus, this
partnership marks a new era for the Peruvian economy. (Owen, 2024)

#### Effect on family economies

The anti-coca policies imposed in 1995 have had adverse effects on Peruvian's
household economies. Many families dependent on coca farming have been forced
to send their children to work as eradication of crops has decreased their
household income. In states where coca is grown, child labour increased by 18%
in 1997 and 40% in 2000. Work hours and domestic work increased as well, with
girls taking on 28% more domestic work with boys doing 13% more. Wage work for
adults also increased since 1995. As such, it can be inferred that the
increase in child labour since eradication policies have come into effect is
caused by children filling in for working parents. However, the issue of child
labour in cocoa production is still present in Peru as reported in 2013 in the
U.S. Department of Labor's report _Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor_
and in December 2014, in the Bureau of International Labor Affairs's _List of
Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor_.

### Corruption

Peru is the 101st least corrupt country in the world according to Transparency
International's Corruption Perceptions Index.

The Peruvian organization _"Ciudadanos al Dia"_ has started to measure and
compare transparency, costs, and efficiency in different government
departments in Peru. It annually awards the best practices which has received
widespread media attention. This has created competition among government
agencies to improve.

A recent case of corruption was the 2008 oil scandal, which caused protests in
large cities around Peru. The cabinet has to resign due to the
scandal.However, a judge absolved all the officials involved in the case in
2016.

## Statistics

### Main economic indicators

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF
staff stimtates in 2022–2027). Inflation below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$nominal) | GDP per capita (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 53.9  | 3,111.3  | 20.2  | 1,164.8  | 7.7%  | 59.1%  | 7.3%  | n/a   
1981  | 62.3  | 3,503.5  | 24.4  | 1,373.1  | 5.5%  | 75.4%  | 6.8%  | n/a   
1982  | 65.9  | 3,618.9  | 24.3  | 1,332.5  | -0.3%  | 64.5%  | 6.4%  | n/a   
1983  | 62.1  | 3,329.7  | 18.9  | 1,011.7  | -9.3%  | 111.1%  | 9.0%  | n/a   
1984  | 66.8  | 3,498.4  | 19.4  | 1,018.8  | 3.8%  | 110.2%  | 8.9%  | n/a   
1985  | 70.3  | 3,601.1  | 16.8  | 861.6  | 2.1%  | 163.4%  | 4.6%  | n/a   
1986  | 80.4  | 4,026.1  | 25.2  | 1,263.7  | 12.1%  | 77.9%  | 5.3%  | n/a   
1987  | 88.8  | 4,346.5  | 41.7  | 2,040.7  | 7.7%  | 85.8%  | 4.8%  | n/a   
1988  | 83.3  | 3,987.4  | 33.0  | 1,579.5  | -9.4%  | 667.0%  | 4.2%  | n/a   
1989  | 74.9  | 3,512.3  | 40.7  | 1,908.5  | -13.4%  | 3398.3%  | 7.9%  | n/a   
1990  | 73.8  | 3,388.6  | 28.3  | 1,301.5  | -5.1%  | 7481.7%  | 8.3%  | n/a   
1991  | 77.9  | 3,510.0  | 34.0  | 1,530.7  | 2.2%  | 409.5%  | 5.9%  | n/a   
1992  | 79.3  | 3,501.8  | 35.4  | 1,562.6  | -0.5%  | 73.5%  | 9.4%  | n/a   
1993  | 85.4  | 3,702.0  | 34.3  | 1,487.9  | 5.2%  | 48.6%  | 9.9%  | n/a   
1994  | 98.0  | 4,169.0  | 43.2  | 1,839.2  | 12.3%  | 23.7%  | 8.8%  | n/a   
1995  | 107.4  | 4,490.8  | 51.4  | 2,147.4  | 7.4%  | 11.1%  | 7.1%  | n/a   
1996  | 112.5  | 4,619.6  | 53.4  | 2,193.7  | 2.8%  | 11.5%  | 7.2%  | n/a   
1997  | 121.8  | 4,918.8  | 56.3  | 2,272.4  | 6.5%  | 8.5%  | 8.6%  | n/a   
1998  | 122.7  | 4,873.1  | 53.9  | 2,141.1  | -0.4%  | 7.3%  | 6.9%  | n/a   
1999  | 126.3  | 4,936.0  | 48.7  | 1,903.9  | 1.5%  | 3.5%  | 9.4%  | n/a   
2000  | 132.6  | 5,105.1  | 50.4  | 1,940.2  | 2.7%  | 3.8%  | 7.8%  | 44.9%   
2001  | 136.5  | 5,176.0  | 51.0  | 1,935.5  | 0.6%  | 2.0%  | 9.2%  | 43.8%   
2002  | 146.2  | 5,466.1  | 54.0  | 2,017.8  | 5.5%  | 0.2%  | 9.4%  | 45.5%   
2003  | 155.3  | 5,728.1  | 58.5  | 2,159.7  | 4.2%  | 2.3%  | 9.4%  | 49.4%   
2004  | 167.3  | 6,093.4  | 66.1  | 2,408.1  | 5.0%  | 3.7%  | 9.4%  | 46.7%   
2005  | 183.4  | 6,595.2  | 74.2  | 2,669.2  | 6.3%  | 1.6%  | 9.6%  | 40.4%   
2006  | 203.3  | 7,222.1  | 87.5  | 3,106.7  | 7.5%  | 2.0%  | 8.5%  | 34.9%   
2007  | 226.6  | 7,955.7  | 102.2  | 3,587.8  | 8.5%  | 1.8%  | 8.4%  | 31.9%   
2008  | 252.0  | 8,748.4  | 121.3  | 4,209.0  | 9.1%  | 5.8%  | 8.4%  | 28.0%   
2009  | 256.4  | 8,801.7  | 121.8  | 4,179.7  | 1.1%  | 2.9%  | 8.4%  | 28.3%   
2010  | 281.1  | 9,541.6  | 148.9  | 5,055.5  | 8.3%  | 1.5%  | 7.9%  | 25.3%   
2011  | 305.1  | 10,239.4  | 170.9  | 5,736.1  | 6.3%  | 3.4%  | 7.7%  | 23.0%   
2012  | 318.4  | 10,567.0  | 193.1  | 6,407.6  | 6.1%  | 3.7%  | 6.8%  | 21.1%   
2013  | 338.7  | 11,115.3  | 202.6  | 6,647.5  | 5.9%  | 2.8%  | 5.9%  | 19.9%   
2014  | 349.9  | 11,356.0  | 202.9  | 6,584.0  | 2.4%  | 3.2%  | 5.9%  | 20.6%   
2015  | 356.8  | 11,454.4  | 192.0  | 6,164.2  | 3.3%  | 3.5%  | 6.5%  | 24.0%   
2016  | 378.5  | 12,019.8  | 195.5  | 6,207.4  | 4.0%  | 3.6%  | 6.7%  | 24.3%   
2017  | 402.0  | 12,631.7  | 215.7  | 6,776.9  | 2.5%  | 2.8%  | 6.9%  | 25.2%   
2018  | 428.0  | 13,307.2  | 226.8  | 7,051.6  | 4.0%  | 1.3%  | 6.7%  | 26.0%   
2019  | 445.4  | 13,430.2  | 232.3  | 7,006.3  | 2.2%  | 2.1%  | 6.6%  | 26.9%   
2020  | 401.1  | 11,975.3  | 205.8  | 6,145.0  | -11.0%  | 1.8%  | 13.9%  | 35.0%   
2021  | 474.4  | 14,022.8  | 225.9  | 6,678.9  | 13.6%  | 4.0%  | 10.9%  | 36.4%   
2022  | 521.8  | 15,273.2  | 239.3  | 7,004.8  | 2.7%  | 7.5%  | 7.6%  | 34.8%   
2023  | 554.5  | 16,067.4  | 253.8  | 7,353.4  | 2.6%  | 4.4%  | 7.5%  | 35.7%   
2024  | 584.2  | 16,762.7  | 266.8  | 7,655.6  | 3.2%  | 2.5%  | 7.4%  | 35.7%   
2025  | 613.5  | 17,428.4  | 279.7  | 7,945.5  | 3.1%  | 2.1%  | 7.3%  | 35.7%   
2026  | 644.0  | 18,111.8  | 293.2  | 8,246.5  | 3.0%  | 2.0%  | 7.2%  | 35.2%   
2027  | 676.1  | 18,828.5  | 307.4  | 8,560.9  | 3.0%  | 2.0%  | 7.0%  | 34.3%   
Peru's poverty rate from 2004 to 2012.

**Household income or consumption by percentage share:**  
_lowest 10%:_ 0.8%  
_highest 10%:_ 37.5% (2000)

**Inflation rate (consumer prices):** 2.08% (2010)

**Budget:**  
_revenues:_ $57 billion (2014 est.)  
_expenditures:_ $50 billion, including long-term capital expenditures of $3.8
billion (2010 est.)

**Industrial production growth rate:** 12% (2013 est.)

**Electricity – production:** 175,500 GWh (2013 est.)

**Electricity – production by source:**  
_natural gas:_ 44.53%  
_hydro:_ 54.79%  
_nuclear:_ 0%  
_other:_ 0.68% (2013)

**Electricity – consumption:** 133,000 GWh (2013)

**Electricity – exports:** 32,000 kWh (2013) mainly to Ecuador

**Electricity – imports:** 0 kWh (2013)

**Agriculture – products:** coffee, cotton, sugarcane, rice, wheat, potatoes,
plantains, coca; poultry, beef, dairy products, wool; fish

**Exports:** 63.5 billion f.o.b. (2013 est.) of goods and products. 10.5
billion f.o.b. (2013 est.) of services. Total Exports $73.5 billion f.o.b.
(2013) **Exports:** fish and fish products, copper, zinc, gold, molybdenum,
iron, crude petroleum and byproducts, lead; coffee, asparagus, artichokes,
paprika, sugar, cotton, textiles, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, manufactures,
machinery, services.

**Exports – partners:** Mainland China 20%, United States 15%, European Union
15%, Brazil 10%, Chile 10%, Japan 5%, Mexico 5%, United Kingdom 5%, Bolivia 5%
Rest of Latin America 5%, Rest of world 5%, (2013)

**Imports:** Total Imports $68 billion f.o.b. (2013)

**Imports – commodities:** machinery, transport equipment, foodstuffs, iron
and steel, pharmaceuticals, electronics, petroleum and chemicals.

**Imports – partners:** Mainland China 25%, US 15%, European Union 15%, Brazil
10%, Japan 10%, Chile 5%, Colombia 5%, Mexico 5%, Ecuador 4%, Bolivia 1%, Rest
of World 5% (2013).

## Trade agreements

According to the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism, Peru decided to
negotiate trade agreements to consolidate the access of Peruvian exports to
its most important markets by giving them permanent benefits unlimited in time
and coverage as opposed to temporary commercial preferences given unilaterally
by certain countries; a system that did not allow Peruvian exporters embark in
long-term export-related investments.

**Economic Complementation Agreement**

  * Integration Agreement with Andean Community of Nations:  Bolivia,  Ecuador and  Colombia (signed and effective 1969)
  * ACE 50 with  Cuba (signed October 2000 and effective 2001)
  * ACE 58 with  Mercosur (signed August 2003 and effective November 2005)

  
---  
**FTA (Free Trade Agreement) currently in force**

  * FTA with  United States (signed April 2006 and effective February 2009).
  * FTA with  Chile (signed August 2006 and effective March 2009)
  * FTA with  Canada(_**CPFTA**_) (signed May 2008 and effective August 2009)
  * FTA with  Singapore (signed May 2008 and effective August 2009)
  * FTA with  China (signed April 2009 and effective March 2010)
  * FTA with  South Korea (signed March 2011 and effective August 2011)
  * Partial FTA with  Thailand (last protocol signed November 2010 and effective December 2011)
  * FTA with  Mexico (signed April 2011 and effective February 2012)
  * FTA with  Japan (signed May 2011 and effective March 2012)
  * FTA with  Panama (signed May 2011 and effective May 2012)
  * FTA with EFTA  Switzerland,  Liechtenstein,  Iceland and  Norway (signed July 2010,  Switzerland and  Liechtenstein effective July 2011,  Iceland effective October 2011,  Norway effective July 2012)
  * FTA with  European Union (signed April 2011 and effective February 2013)
  * FTA with  Costa Rica (signed May 2011 and effective June 2013)
  * Partial FTA with  Venezuela (signed January 2012 and effective August 2013)
  * FTA with Pacific Alliance (signed February 2014 and effective May 2016)
  * FTA with  Honduras (signed May 2015 and effective January 2017)

  
**FTA (Free Trade Agreement) concluded**

  * Guatemala (signed December 2011)
  * Brazil (signed April 2016)
  * Australia (signed February 2018)
  * CPTPP (signed March 2018)

  
**FTA (Free Trade Agreement) in negotiation**

  * El Salvador
  * India
  * Turkey

  
  
### Peru – United States Trade Promotion Agreement

The _United States – Peru Trade Promotion Agreement_ (Spanish: _Tratado de
Libre Comercio Perú – Estados Unidos_) is a bilateral free trade agreement,
whose objectives are eliminating obstacles to trade, consolidating access to
goods and services and fostering private investment in and between the United
States and Peru. Besides commercial issues, it incorporates economic,
institutional, intellectual property, labor and environmental policies, among
others. The agreement was signed on 12 April 2006; ratified by the Peruvian
Congress on 28 June 2006; by the U.S. House of Representatives on 2 November
2007 and by the U.S. Senate on 4 December 2007. The agreement was implemented
on 1 February 2009.

Peru looks to the agreement are to:

  * Consolidate and extend the trade preferences under ATPDEA
  * Attract foreign investment
  * Generate employment
  * Enhance the country's competitiveness within the region
  * Increase workers' income
  * Curb poverty levels
  * Create and export sugar cane ethanol

The United States looks to the agreement to:

  * Improve access to goods and services
  * Strengthen its investments
  * Promote security and democracy
  * Fight against drug trafficking

The U.S.-Peru agreement has faced criticism. In Peru, the treaty was
championed by Toledo, and supported to different extents by former President
Alan García and candidates Lourdes Flores and Valentín Paniagua. Ollanta
Humala has been its most vocal critic. Humala's Union for Peru won 45 of 120
seats in Congress in 2006, the largest share by a single party, prompting
debate on ratification of the agreement before the new legislature was sworn
in. Some Congressmen-elect interrupted the debate after forcibly entering
Congress in an attempt to stop the agreement ratification.

One controversial element of the agreement relates to land resources. Laura
Carlsen, of the Center for International Policy, who is also a contributor to
Foreign Policy in Focus notes that "Indigenous organizations warn that this
ruling effectively opens up 45 million hectares to foreign investment and
timber, oil, and mining exploitation."

However, most of the criticism of the agreement has focused on its potential
impact on Peru's agricultural sector. By planting crops to similar to those
subsidized by the U.S., Peru faced a competitive disadvantage in the
production of agricultural products because poor farming families with
inadequate tools, technology and techniques may not be able to produce crops
at low enough prices to export. In response to these concerns, Peruvian
lawmakers created a Compensation Fund which directed $34 million per year to
cotton, maize/corn, and wheat producers for a five-year period to help them
adjust to the new competitive pressures.

Toledo is therefore a market-oriented politician who continued to globalize
Peru's economy and is rumored to be getting ready for another run for
president. Toledo says bluntly that unless the poorest in the country are
better educated, better paid, housed, and fed, the Peruvian economic miracle
will stall.