The **economy of Chile** operates as a market economy and is classified as a
high-income economy by the World Bank. It is recognized as one of the most
prosperous countries in South America, leading the region in areas such as
competitiveness, income per capita, globalization, economic freedom, and low
levels of perceived corruption. Despite its prosperity, Chile experiences
significant economic inequality, as reflected by its Gini index, though this
is close to the regional average. Among Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) countries, Chile has a robust social security system,
with social welfare expenditures amounting to approximately 19.6% of GDP.

In 2006, Chile achieved the highest nominal GDP per capita in Latin America.
In May 2010, it became the first South American nation to join the OECD.
However, tax revenues, which were 20.2% of GDP in 2013, remained the second
lowest among the 34 OECD countries, having been the lowest in 2010. Chile's
inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (HDI) was 0.704, compared to 0.747
for Argentina, 0.720 for Uruguay, and 0.577 for Brazil. As of 2017, only 0.7%
of Chile's population lived on less than $1.90 per day. According to
statistics of the Chilean government, 20.9% of the population continues to be
affected by multidimensional poverty.

The Global Competitiveness Report for 2009–2010 ranked Chile as the 30th most
competitive country in the world and the highest-ranked in Latin America,
significantly outperforming Brazil (56th), Mexico (60th), and Argentina
(85th); however, Chile has since fallen out of the top 30. According to the
World Bank's Ease of Doing Business Index, Chile was ranked 34th globally in
2014, 41st in 2015, and 48th in 2016. Chile's privatized national pension
system, known as the Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones (AFP), contributed
to a domestic savings rate of about 21% of GDP. In 2023, in response to an
economic slowdown, Chile introduced a temporary basic income program aimed at
supporting families through transfer payments as part of an expansionary
fiscal policy.

## History

Change in per capita GDP of Chile, 1820–2018. Figures are inflation-adjusted
to 2011 international dollars.

After Spanish arrival in the 15th century Chilean economy came to revolve
around autarchy estates called fundos and around the army that was engaged in
the Arauco War. During early colonial times there were gold exports to Peru
from placer deposits which soon depleted. Trade restrictions and monopolies
established by the Spanish crown are credited for having held back economic
development for much of the colonial times. As effect of these restrictions
the country incorporated very few new crops and animal breeds after initial
conquest. Other sectors that were held back by restrictions were the wine and
mining industries. The Bourbon reforms in the 18th century eased many
monopolies and trade restrictions.

In the 1830s Chile consolidated under the ideas of Diego Portales as a stable
state open to foreign trade. Foreign investment in Chile grew over the 19th
century. After the War of the Pacific the Chilean treasury grew by 900%. The
League of Nations labeled Chile the country hardest hit by the Great
Depression because 80% of government revenue came from exports of copper and
nitrates, which were in low demand. After the Great Depression Chilean
economic policies changed toward import substitution industrialization and the
Production Development Corporation was established.

Under the influence of the Chicago Boys the Pinochet regime made of Chile a
leading country in establishing neoliberal policies. These policies allowed
large corporations to consolidate their power over the Chilean economy,
leading to long-term economic growth. The crisis of 1982 caused the
appointment of Hernán Büchi as minister of finance and a sharp revision of
economic policy. Despite a general selling of state property and contrary to
neoliberal prescriptions, the regime retained the lucrative state owned mining
company Codelco which stands for about 30% of government income.

According to the CIA World Factbook, during the early 1990s, Chile's
reputation as a role model for economic reform was strengthened when the
democratic government of Patricio Aylwin, who took over from the military in
1990, deepened the economic reform initiated by the military government. The
Aylwin government departed significantly from the neoliberal doctrine of the
Chicago boys, as evidenced by higher government expenditure on social programs
to tackle poverty and poor quality housing. Growth in real GDP averaged 8%
from 1991 to 1997,[_citation needed_] but fell to half that level in 1998
because of tight monetary policies (implemented to keep the current account
deficit in check) and lower exports due to the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
Chile's economy has since recovered and has seen growth rates of 5–7% over the
past several years.[_citation needed_]

After a decade of impressive growth rates, Chile began to experience a
moderate economic downturn in 1999, brought on by unfavorable global economic
conditions related to the 1997 Asian financial crisis. The economy remained
sluggish until 2003, when it began to show clear signs of recovery, achieving
4.0% real GDP growth. The Chilean economy finished 2004 with growth of 6.0%.
Real GDP growth reached 5.7% in 2005 before falling back to 4.0% in 2006. GDP
expanded by 5.1% in 2007.

## Sectors

During 2012, the largest sectors by GDP were mining (mainly copper), business
services, personal services, manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade.
Mining also represented 59.5% of exports in the period, while the
manufacturing sector accounted for 34% of exports, concentrated mainly in food
products, chemicals and pulp, paper and others.

### Agriculture

Chile is one of the 5 largest world producers of cherry and cranberry, and one
of the 10 largest world producers of grape, apple, kiwi, peach, plum and
hazelnut, focusing on exporting high-value fruits.

In 2018, Chile was the 9th largest producer of grapes in the world, with 2
million tons produced; the 10th largest producer of apples in the world, with
1.7 million tons produced; and the 6th largest producer of kiwi in the world,
with 230 thousand tons produced, in addition to producing 1.4 million tons of
wheat, 1.1 million tons of maize, 1.1 million tons of potatoes, 951 thousand
tons of tomatoes, 571 thousand tons of oats, 368 thousand tons of onions, 319
thousand tons of peaches, 280 thousand tons of pears, 192 thousand tons of
rice, 170 thousand tons of barley, 155 thousand tons of cherries, 151 thousand
tons of lemons, 118 thousand tons of tangerines, 113 thousand tons of oranges,
110 thousand tons of olives, 106 thousand tons of cranberries, in addition to
smaller productions of other agricultural products.

Agriculture and allied sectors like forestry, logging and fishing accounts
only for 4.9% of the GDP as of 2007 and employed 13.6% of the country's labor
force. Some major agriculture products of Chile includes grapes, apples,
pears, onions, wheat, corn, oats, peaches, garlic, asparagus, beans, beef,
poultry, wool, fish and timber.

Chile's position in the Southern Hemisphere leads to an agricultural season
cycle opposite to those of the principal consumer markets, primarily located
in the Northern Hemisphere. Chile's extreme north–south orientation produces
seven different macro-regions distinguished by climate and geographical
features, which allows the country itself to stagger harvests and results in
extended harvesting seasons. However, the mountainous landscape of Chile
limits the extent and intensity of agriculture so that arable land corresponds
only to 2.62% of the total territory. Through Chile's trade agreements, its
agricultural products have gained access to a market controlling 77% of the
world's GDP and by approximately 2012, 74% of Chilean agribusiness exports
will be duty-free.

Chile's principal growing region and agricultural heartland is the Central
Valley delimited by the Chilean Coast Range in the west, the Andes in the east
Aconcagua River by the north and Bío-Bío River by the south. In the northern
half of Chile cultivation is highly dependent on irrigation. South of the
Central Valley cultivation is gradually replaced by aquaculture, silviculture,
sheep and cattle farming.

#### Salmon

Chile is the second largest producer of salmon in the world. As of August
2007, Chile's share of worldwide salmon industry sales was 38.2%, rising from
just 10% in 1990. The average growth rate of the industry for the 20 years
between 1984 and 2004 was 42% per year. The presence of large foreign firms in
the salmon industry has brought what probably most contributes to Chile's
burgeoning salmon production, technology. Technology transfer has allowed
Chile to build its global competitiveness and innovation and has led to the
expansion of production as well as to an increase in average firm size in the
industry. In November 2018, the Chinese company Joyvio Group (Legend Holdings)
bought the Chilean salmon producer Australis Seafoods for $880 million, thus
gaining control over 30% of all Chilean salmon exports.

#### Forestry

The Chilean forestry industry grew to comprise 13% of the country's total
exports in 2005, making it one of the largest export sectors for Chile.
Radiata Pine and Eucalyptus comprise the vast majority of Chile's forestry
exports. Within the forestry sector, the largest contributor to total
production is pulp, followed by wood-based panels and lumber. Due to popular
and increasing demands for Chile's forestry products, the government is
currently focusing on increasing the already vast acreage of Chile's Pine and
Eucalyptus plantations as well as opening new industrial plants.

#### Wine

Wines of Chile

Chile's unique geography and climate make it ideal for winegrowing and the
country has made the top ten list of wine producers many times in the last few
decades.

The popularity of Chilean wine has been attributed not just to the quantity
produced but also to increasing levels of quality. The combination of quantity
and quality allows Chile to export excellent wines at reasonable prices to the
international market.

### Mining

Chile produces more than a third of the world's copper.

The mining sector in Chile is one of the pillars of Chilean economy. The
Chilean government strongly supports foreign investment in the sector and has
modified its mining industry laws and regulations to create a favorable
investing environment for foreigners. Thanks to a large amount of copper
resources, complaisant legislation and an unregulated investment environment,
Chile has become one of the main copper producers, with almost 30% of the
global annual copper output.

In addition to copper, Chile was, in 2019, the world's largest producer of
iodine and rhenium, the second largest producer of lithium and molybdenum, the
sixth largest producer of silver, the seventh largest producer of salt, the
eighth largest producer of potash, the thirteenth producer of sulfur and the
thirteenth producer of iron ore in the world. The country also has
considerable gold production: between 2006 and 2017, the country produced
annual amounts ranging from 35.9 tonnes in 2017 to 51.3 tonnes in 2013.

### Services

The service sector in Chile has grown fast and consistently in recent decades,
reinforced by the rapid development of communication and information
technology, access to education and an increase in specialist skills and
knowledge among the workforce. Chilean foreign policy has recognized the
importance of the tertiary sector or service sector to the economy, boosting
its international liberalization and leading to the signing of several free
trade area agreements. Chilean service exportation consists mainly of maritime
and aeronautical services, tourism, retail (department stores, supermarkets,
and shopping centers), engineering and construction services, informatics,
health and education.

Chile ranked first among Latin American countries (and No. 32 worldwide) in
Adecco's 2019 Global Talent Competitiveness Index (GTCI).

#### Finance

Chile's financial sector has grown quickly in recent years, with a banking
reform law approved in 1997 that broadened the scope of permissible foreign
activity for Chilean banks. The Chilean Government implemented a further
liberalization of capital markets in 2001, and there is further pending
legislation proposing further liberalization. Over the last ten years, people
who live in Chile have enjoyed the introduction of new financial tools such as
home equity loans, currency futures and options, factoring, leasing, and debit
cards. The introduction of these new products has also been accompanied by an
increased use of traditional instruments such as loans and credit cards.
Chile's private pension system, with assets worth roughly $70 billion at the
end of 2006, has been an important source of investment capital for the
capital market. However, by 2009, it was reported that $21 billion had been
lost from the pension system to the 2008 financial crisis.

#### Tourism

Elqui Valley, wine and pisco region

Tourism in Chile has experienced sustained growth over the last decades. Chile
received about 2.25 million foreign visitors in 2006, up to 2.50 million in
2007 The percentages of foreign tourists arrivals by land, air and sea were,
respectively, 55.3%, 40.5% and 4.2% for that year. The two main gateways for
international tourists visiting Chile are Arturo Merino Benítez International
Airport and Paso Los Libertadores.

Chile has a great diversity of natural landscapes, from the Mars-like
landscapes of the hyperarid Atacama Desert to the glacier-fed fjords of the
Chilean Patagonia, passing by the winelands backdropped by the Andes of the
Central Valley and the old-growth forests of the Lakes District. Easter Island
and Juan Fernández Archipelago, including Robinson Crusoe Island, are also
major attractions.

Many of the most visited attractions in Chile are protected areas. The
extensive Chilean protected areas system includes 32 protected parks, 48
natural reserves and 15 natural monuments.

## Economic policies

Chilean (blue) and average Latin American (orange) GDP per capita (1980–2017).

According to the CIA World Factbook, Chile's "sound economic policies",
maintained consistently since the 1980s, "have contributed to steady economic
growth in Chile and have more than halved poverty rates." The 1973–90 military
government sold many state-owned companies, and the three democratic
governments since 1990 have implemented export promotion policies and
continued privatization, though at a slower pace. The government's role in the
economy is mostly limited to regulation, although the state continues to
operate copper giant Codelco and a few other enterprises such as BancoEstado.

Under the compulsory private pension system, most formal sector employees pay
10% of their salaries into privately managed funds.

As of 2006, Chile invested 0.6% of its annual GDP in research and development
(R&D). Even then, two-thirds of that was government spending. Beyond its
general economic and political stability, the government has also encouraged
the use of Chile as an "investment platform" for multinational corporations
planning to operate in the region.[_specify_] Chile's approach to foreign
direct investment is codified in the country's Foreign Investment Law, which
gives foreign investors the same treatment as Chileans. Registration is
reported to be simple and transparent, and foreign investors are guaranteed
access to the official foreign exchange market to repatriate their profits and
capital.

Faced with the 2008 financial crisis, the government announced a $4 billion
economic stimulus plan to spur employment and growth, and despite the 2008
financial crisis, aimed for an expansion of between 2% and 3% of GDP for 2009.
Nonetheless, economic analysts disagreed with government estimates and
predicted economic growth at a median of 1.5 percent. According to the CIA
World FactBook, the GDP contracted an estimated −1.7% in 2009.

The Chilean Government has formed a Council on Innovation and Competition,
which is tasked with identifying new sectors and industries to promote. It is
hoped that this, combined with some tax reforms to encourage domestic and
foreign investment in research and development, will bring in additional FDI
to new parts of the economy.

According to The Heritage Foundation's _Index of Economic Freedom_ in 2012,
Chile has the strongest private property rights in Latin America, scoring 90
on a scale of 100.

Chile's AA− S&P credit rating is the highest in Latin America, while Fitch
Ratings places the country one step below, in A+.

There are three main ways for Chilean firms to raise funds abroad: bank loans,
issuance of bonds, and the selling of stocks on U.S. markets through American
Depository Receipts (ADRs). Nearly all of the funds raised through these means
go to finance domestic Chilean investment. In 2006, the Government of Chile
ran a surplus of $11.3 billion, equal to almost 8% of GDP. The Government of
Chile continues to pay down its foreign debt, with public debt only 3.9% of
GDP at the end of 2006.

### Fiscal policy

One of Chile's fiscal policy central features has been its counter-cyclical
nature. This has been facilitated by the voluntary application since 2001 of a
structural balance policy based on the commitment to an announced goal of a
medium-term structural balance as a percentage of GDP. The structural balance
nets out the effect of the economic cycle (including copper price volatility)
on fiscal revenues and constrains expenditures to a correspondingly consistent
level. In practice, this means that expenditures rise when activity is low and
decrease in booms The target was of 1% of GDP between 2001 and 2007, it was
reduced to 0.5% in 2008 and then to 0% in 2009 in the wake of the 2008
financial crisis. In 2005, key elements of this voluntary policy were
incorporated into legislation through the Fiscal Responsibility Law (Law
20,128).

The Fiscal Responsibility Law also allowed for the creation of two sovereign
wealth funds: the Pension Reserve Fund (PRF), to face increased expected old-
age benefits liabilities, and the Economic and Social Stabilization Fund
(ESSF), to stabilize fiscal spending by providing funds to finance fiscal
deficits and debt amortization. By the end of 2012, they had respective market
values of US$5.883 million and US$14.998 million.

The main taxes in Chile in terms of revenue collection are the value added tax
(45.8% of total revenues in 2012) and the income tax (41.8% of total revenues
in 2012). The value added tax is levied on sales of goods and services
(including imports) at a rate of 19%, with a few exemptions. The income tax
revenue comprises different taxes. While there is a corporate income tax of
20% over profits from companies (called First Category Tax), the system is
ultimately designed to tax individuals. Therefore, corporate income taxes paid
constitute a credit towards two personal income taxes: the Global
Complementary Tax (in the case of residents) or the Additional Tax (in the
case of non-residents). The Global Complementary Tax is payable by those that
have different sources of income, while those receiving income solely from
dependent work are subject to the Second Category Tax. Both taxes are equally
progressive in statutory terms, with a top marginal rate of 40%. Income
arising from corporate activity under the Global Complementary Tax only
becomes payable when effectively distributed to the individual. There are also
special sales taxes on alcohol and luxury goods, as well as specific taxes on
tobacco and fuel. Other taxes include the inheritance tax and custom duties.

In 2012, general government expenditure reached 21.5% of GDP, while revenues
were equivalent to 22% of GDP. Gross financial debt amounted to 12.2% of GDP,
while in net terms it was −6.9% of GDP, both well below OECD averages.

### Monetary policy

Chile's monetary authority is the Central Bank of Chile (CBoC). The CBoC
pursues an inflation target of 3%, with a tolerance range of 1% (below or
above). Inflation has followed a relatively stable trajectory since the year
2000, remaining under 10%, despite the temporary surge of some inflationary
pressures in the year 2008. The Chilean peso's rapid appreciation against the
U.S. dollar in recent years has helped dampen inflation. Most wage settlements
and loans are indexed, reducing inflation's volatility.

The CBoC is granted autonomous status by Chile's National Constitution,
providing credibility and stability beyond the political cycle. According to
the Basic Constitutional Act of the Central Bank of Chile (Law 18,840), its
main objectives are to safeguard "the stability of the currency and the normal
functioning of internal and external payments". To meet these objectives, the
CBoC is enabled to use monetary and foreign exchange policy instruments, along
with some discretion on financial regulation. In practice, the CBoC monetary
policy is guided by an inflation targeting regime, while the foreign exchange
policy is led by a floating exchange rate and, although unusual, the bank
reserves the right to intervene in the foreign exchange markets.

### Trade policy

Chile is strongly committed to free trade and has welcomed large amounts of
foreign investment. Chile has signed free trade agreements (FTAs) with a
network of countries, including an FTA with the United States that was signed
in 2003 and implemented in January 2004.

Chile unilaterally lowered its across-the-board import tariff for all
countries with which it does not have a trade agreement to 6% in 2003. Higher
effective tariffs are charged only on imports of wheat, wheat flour, and sugar
as a result of a system of import price bands. The price bands were ruled
inconsistent with Chile's World Trade Organization (WTO) obligations in 2002,
and the government has introduced legislation to modify them. Under the terms
of the U.S.–Chile FTA, the price bands will be completely phased out for U.S.
imports of wheat, wheat flour, and sugar within 12 years.

Chile is a strong proponent of pressing ahead on negotiations for a Free Trade
Area of the Americas (FTAA) and is active in the WTO's Doha round of
negotiations, principally through its membership in the G-20 and Cairns Group.

Most imports are not subject to the full statutory tariff, due to the
extensive preferences negotiated outside the multilateral system through
Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs). By the last version of the World Trade
Organization's Trade Policy Review (October 2009), Chile had signed 21 RTAs
with 57 countries and the number has continued to rise in recent years

More recently, Chile has also been an active participant of deeper
plurilateral trade agreement negotiations. Notably, Chile is currently in
talks with eleven other economies in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a
proposed agreement that would stem from the existing P-4 Agreement between
Brunei, Chile, New Zealand and Singapore. Chile has signed some form of
bilateral or plurilateral agreement with each of the parties at TPP, although
with different degrees of integration.

Chile is also a party in conversations to establish the Pacific Alliance along
with Peru, Mexico and Colombia.

#### Foreign trade

Chile is the world's fifth largest exporter of wine and the eighth largest
producer.

2006 was a record year for Chilean trade. Total trade registered a 31%
increase over 2005. During 2006, exports of goods and services totaled US$58
billion, an increase of 41%. This figure was somewhat distorted by the
skyrocketing price of copper. In 2006, copper exports reached a historical
high of US$33.3 billion. Imports totaled US$35 billion, an increase of 17%
compared to the previous year. Chile thus recorded a positive trade balance of
US$2.3 billion in 2006.

The main destinations for Chilean exports were the Americas (US$39 billion),
Asia (US$27.8 billion) and Europe (US$22.2 billion). Seen as shares of Chile's
export markets, 42% of exports went to the Americas, 30% to Asia and 24% to
Europe. Within Chile's diversified network of trade relationships, its most
important partner remained the United States. Total trade with the U.S. was
US$14.8 billion in 2006. Since the U.S.–Chile Free Trade Agreement went into
effect on 1 January 2004, U.S.–Chilean trade has increased by 154%. Internal
Government of Chile figures show that even when factoring out inflation and
the recent high price of copper, bilateral trade between the U.S. and Chile
has grown over 60% since then.

Total trade with Europe also grew in 2006, expanding by 42%. The Netherlands
and Italy were Chile's main European trading partners. Total trade with Asia
also grew significantly at nearly 31%. Trade with Korea and Japan grew
significantly, but China remained Chile's most important trading partner in
Asia. Chile's total trade with China reached U.S. $8.8 billion in 2006,
representing nearly 66% of the value of its trade relationship with Asia.=

The growth of exports in 2006 was mainly caused by a strong increase in sales
to the United States, the Netherlands, and Japan. These three markets alone
accounted for an additional US$5.5 billion worth of Chilean exports. Chilean
exports to the United States totaled US$9.3 billion, representing a 37.7%
increase compared to 2005 (US$6.7 billion). Exports to the European Union were
US$15.4 billion, a 63.7% increase compared to 2005 (US$9.4 billion). Exports
to Asia increased from US$15.2 billion in 2005 to US$19.7 billion in 2006, a
29.9% increase.

During 2006, Chile imported US$26 billion from the Americas, representing 54%
of total imports, followed by Asia at 22%, and Europe at 16%. Mercosur members
were the main suppliers of imports to Chile at US$9.1 billion, followed by the
United States with US$5.5 billion and the European Union with US$5.2 billion.
From Asia, China was the most important exporter to Chile, with goods valued
at US$3.6 billion. Year-on-year growth in imports was especially strong from a
number of countries – Ecuador (123.9%), Thailand (72.1%), Korea (52.6%), and
China (36.9%).

Chile's overall trade profile has traditionally been dependent upon copper
exports. The state-owned firm CODELCO is the world's largest copper-producing
company, with recorded copper reserves of 200 years. Chile has made an effort
to expand nontraditional exports. The most important non-mineral exports are
forestry and wood products, fresh fruit and processed food, fishmeal and
seafood, and wine.

#### Trade agreements

Nations that have an FTA with Chile appear in dark blue, those that have not
ratified a negotiated FTA in light blue, and those in FTA negotiations in
purple. Chile is in red.

Over the last several years, Chile has signed FTAs with the European Union,
South Korea, New Zealand, Singapore, Brunei, China, and Japan. It reached a
partial trade agreement with India in 2005 and began negotiations for a full-
fledged FTA with India in 2006. Chile conducted trade negotiations in 2007
with Australia, Malaysia, and Thailand, as well as with China to expand an
existing agreement beyond just trade in goods. Chile concluded FTA
negotiations with Australia and an expanded agreement with China in 2008. The
members of the P4 (Chile, Singapore, New Zealand, and Brunei) also plan to
conclude a chapter on finance and investment in 2008.

Successive Chilean governments have actively pursued trade-liberalizing
agreements. During the 1990s, Chile signed free trade agreements (FTA) with
Canada, Mexico, and Central America. Chile also concluded preferential trade
agreements with Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador. An association agreement
with Mercosur-Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay-went into effect in
October 1996. Continuing its export-oriented development strategy, Chile
completed landmark free trade agreements in 2002 with the European Union and
South Korea. Chile, as a member of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
(APEC) organization, is seeking to boost commercial ties to Asian markets. To
that end, it has signed trade agreements in recent years with New Zealand,
Singapore, Brunei, India, China, and most recently Japan. In 2007, Chile held
trade negotiations with Australia, Thailand, Malaysia, and China. In 2008,
Chile hopes to conclude an FTA with Australia, and finalize an expanded
agreement (covering trade in services and investment) with China. The P4
(Chile, Singapore, New Zealand, and Brunei) also plan to expand ties through
adding a finance and investment chapter to the existing P4 agreement. Chile's
trade talks with Malaysia and Thailand are also scheduled to continue in 2008.

After two years of negotiations, the United States and Chile signed an
agreement in June 2003 that will lead to completely duty-free bilateral trade
within 12 years. The U.S.-Chile FTA entered into force 1 January 2004,
following approval by the U.S. and Chilean congresses. The FTA has greatly
expanded U.S.-Chilean trade ties, with total bilateral trade jumping by 154%
during the FTA's first three years. On 1 January 2014, Chile-Vietnam Free
Trade Agreement officially took effect.

## Issues

Unemployment hovered at 8–10% after the start of the economic slowdown in
1999, above the 7% average for the 1990s. Unemployment finally dipped to 7.8%
in 2006, and continued to fall in 2007, averaging 6.8% monthly (up to August).
Wages have risen faster than inflation as a result of higher productivity,
boosting national living standards. The percentage of Chileans with household
incomes below the poverty line – defined as twice the cost of satisfying a
person's minimal nutritional needs – fell from 45.1% in 1987 to 11.7% in 2015,
according to government polls. Critics in Chile, however, argue that poverty
figures are considerably higher than those officially published; until 2016,
the government defined the poverty line based on an outdated 1987 household
consumption poll, instead of more recent polls from 1997 or 2007. According to
critics who use data from the 1997 poll, the poverty rate goes up to 29%; a
study published in 2017 claims that it reaches 26%. Using the relative
yardstick favoured in many European countries, 27% of Chileans would be poor,
according to Juan Carlos Feres of the ECLAC. Starting in 2016, a new
Multidimensional Poverty Index is also used, which reached 20.9% using 2015
data.

The percent of total income earned by the richest 20% of the Chilean
population in 2000 was 61.0% of GDP, while the percent of total income earned
by the poorest 20% of the Chilean population was 3.3% of GDP. Chile's Gini
Coefficient in 2003 (53.8) has slightly changed in comparison with the value
in 1995 (56.4). In 2005 the 10% poorest among the Chileans received 1.2% of
GNP (2000 = 1.4%), while the 10% richest received 47% of GNP (2000 = 46%).

Regarding the census, assessments have exhibited mixed results. An initial
evaluation by a domestic independent experts panel released in August 2013
placed the omission rate in 9.3%, three times as much as other census in the
region, and recommended annulling the census to hold a new version in 2015.
The government sought an assessment by international experts before making a
final decision. The team, which included three experts that represented the
World Bank and the E.U. Statistics Commission, found "no basis for doubting
the usability of the census data for most, if perhaps not all, of the
customary uses" and recommended its release subject to the elimination of the
imputation of housing units not observed on thBy 2021, the combined wealth of
Chile's billionaires represented 16.1% of the country's gross domestic product
(GDP

Historians generally explain the origin of the social gap by tracing it back
to colonial times, when most land was divided between Spaniards and their
descendants. This gave rise to the hacienda, in which society was divided
between owners, employees, tenants and workers. Since this agrarian
inequality, the concentration of wealth has spread to other economic sectors
that exploit natural resources, such as mining. In more recent history, social
inequality deepened in the 1970s and 1980s under Augusto Pinochet's regime,
with the privatization of public enterprises in favor of large family
fortunes, the repression of trade unions and the rejection of the welfare
state. As social mobility is very low in Chile, social status is passed down
from generation to generation.e ground during the enumeration and the
concurrent publication of a methodological and administrative report.

## Social inequalities

By 2021, the combined wealth of Chile's billionaires represented 16.1% of the
country's gross domestic product (GDP).

Historians generally explain the origin of the social gap by tracing it back
to colonial times, when most land was divided between Spaniards and their
descendants. This gave rise to the hacienda, in which society was divided
between owners, employees, tenants and workers. Since this agrarian
inequality, the concentration of wealth has spread to other economic sectors
that exploit natural resources, such as mining. In more recent history, social
inequality deepened in the 1970s and 1980s under Augusto Pinochet's regime,
with the privatization of public enterprises in favor of large family
fortunes, the repression of trade unions and the rejection of the welfare
state. As social mobility is very low in Chile, social status is often passed
down from generation to generation.

## Statistics

### Main economic indicators

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF
staff estimates in 2024–2029). Inflation below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP  
(in bn. US$ PPP) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ PPP) | GDP  
(in bn. US$ nominal) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ nominal) | GDP growth  
(real) | Inflation rate  
(in Percent) | Unemployment  
(in Percent) | Government debt  
(in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 38.1  | 3,411.9  | 29.0  | 2,597.5  | 7.9%  | 35.1%  | 11.5%  | n/a   
1981  | 44.3  | 3,901.8  | 34.4  | 3,025.3  | 6.2%  | 19.7%  | 10.3%  | n/a   
1982  | 40.7  | 3,522.4  | 25.6  | 2,219.4  | -13.6%  | 9.9%  | 19.8%  | n/a   
1983  | 41.1  | 3,501.5  | 20.8  | 1,774.3  | -2.8%  | 27.3%  | 21.0%  | n/a   
1984  | 45.1  | 3,781.6  | 20.2  | 1,698.6  | 5.9%  | 19.9%  | 17.5%  | n/a   
1985  | 47.4  | 3,917.0  | 17.4  | 1,434.1  | 2.0%  | 30.7%  | 15.0%  | n/a   
1986  | 51.1  | 4,145.7  | 18.7  | 1,514.7  | 5.6%  | 19.5%  | 12.3%  | n/a   
1987  | 55.8  | 4,450.0  | 22.0  | 1,755.8  | 6.6%  | 19.9%  | 11.0%  | n/a   
1988  | 61.9  | 4,859.2  | 25.9  | 2,034.9  | 7.3%  | 14.7%  | 9.9%  | n/a   
1989  | 71.2  | 5,492.5  | 29.9  | 2,305.1  | 10.6%  | 17.0%  | 8.0%  | n/a   
1990  | 76.6  | 5,810.7  | 33.2  | 2,521.0  | 3.7%  | 26.0%  | 7.8%  | n/a   
1991  | 85.3  | 6,356.6  | 38.2  | 2,849.1  | 7.8%  | 21.8%  | 8.2%  | 37.1%   
1992  | 97.0  | 7,059.6  | 46.6  | 3,391.3  | 11.1%  | 15.5%  | 6.7%  | 30.5%   
1993  | 105.9  | 7,589.3  | 49.8  | 3,571.3  | 6.7%  | 12.7%  | 6.5%  | 28.1%   
1994  | 113.7  | 8,020.5  | 57.5  | 4,057.6  | 5.1%  | 11.5%  | 7.8%  | 22.6%   
1995  | 126.3  | 8,785.7  | 74.1  | 5,152.7  | 8.9%  | 8.2%  | 7.4%  | 17.3%   
1996  | 137.0  | 9,396.4  | 78.6  | 5,386.1  | 6.5%  | 7.4%  | 6.5%  | 14.6%   
1997  | 149.7  | 10,126.4  | 85.7  | 5,796.3  | 7.4%  | 6.1%  | 6.1%  | 12.8%   
1998  | 157.8  | 10,534.9  | 82.0  | 5,474.1  | 4.2%  | 5.1%  | 6.2%  | 12.1%   
1999  | 159.5  | 10,516.9  | 75.5  | 4,980.1  | -0.3%  | 3.3%  | 10.0%  | 13.3%   
2000  | 171.2  | 11,158.9  | 78.2  | 5,096.3  | 5.0%  | 3.8%  | 9.7%  | 13.2%   
2001  | 180.6  | 11,635.4  | 71.5  | 4,606.8  | 3.1%  | 3.6%  | 9.9%  | 14.4%   
2002  | 189.3  | 12,060.7  | 70.3  | 4,478.9  | 3.2%  | 2.5%  | 9.8%  | 15.0%   
2003  | 202.1  | 12,744.8  | 76.5  | 4,824.7  | 4.7%  | 2.8%  | 9.5%  | 12.6%   
2004  | 221.3  | 13,814.3  | 99.1  | 6,184.4  | 6.7%  | 1.1%  | 10.0%  | 10.3%   
2005  | 241.7  | 14,932.2  | 122.3  | 7,559.8  | 5.9%  | 3.1%  | 9.3%  | 7.0%   
2006  | 264.2  | 16,161.0  | 153.9  | 9,414.7  | 6.1%  | 3.4%  | 8.0%  | 5.0%   
2007  | 285.4  | 17,277.4  | 172.5  | 10,445.4  | 5.2%  | 4.4%  | 7.0%  | 3.9%   
2008  | 301.9  | 18,082.8  | 179.5  | 10,751.5  | 3.8%  | 8.7%  | 7.8%  | 4.9%   
2009  | 300.4  | 17,795.9  | 171.6  | 10,162.9  | -1.1%  | 1.5%  | 11.1%  | 5.9%   
2010  | 321.8  | 18,857.6  | 216.9  | 12,711.0  | 5.8%  | 1.4%  | 8.3%  | 8.6%   
2011  | 349.0  | 20,330.5  | 251.1  | 14,552.1  | 6.2%  | 3.3%  | 7.3%  | 11.1%   
2012  | 374.3  | 21,584.7  | 267.1  | 15,313.6  | 6.2%  | 3.0%  | 6.6%  | 11.9%   
2013  | 392.7  | 22,425.6  | 277.3  | 15,743.3  | 3.3%  | 1.8%  | 6.1%  | 12.8%   
2014  | 402.9  | 22,779.4  | 259.4  | 14,583.0  | 1.8%  | 4.7%  | 6.5%  | 15.0%   
2015  | 405.5  | 22,691.5  | 242.5  | 13,494.1  | 2.2%  | 4.3%  | 6.3%  | 17.4%   
2016  | 424.8  | 23,492.3  | 249.2  | 13,717.6  | 1.7%  | 3.8%  | 6.7%  | 21.1%   
2017  | 450.8  | 24,546.9  | 276.2  | 14,994.3  | 1.3%  | 2.2%  | 7.0%  | 23.7%   
2018  | 478.0  | 25,564.5  | 295.1  | 15,739.9  | 3.9%  | 2.3%  | 7.4%  | 25.8%   
2019  | 492.2  | 25,853.8  | 278.3  | 14,567.6  | 0.9%  | 2.3%  | 7.2%  | 28.3%   
2020  | 491.4  | 25,468.2  | 252.3  | 12,968.5  | -6.1%  | 3.0%  | 10.8%  | 32.6%   
2021  | 566.2  | 29,050.1  | 316.8  | 16,065.0  | 11.7%  | 4.5%  | 8.9%  | 36.3%   
2022  | 619.2  | 31,586.1  | 310.9  | 15,603.6  | 2.0%  | 11.6%  | 7.9%  | 36.2%   
2023  | 653.3  | 33,285.5  | 335.6  | 16,816.4  | 0.2%  | 8.7%  | 8.3%  | 36.9%   
2024  | 679.6  | 34,579.9  | 333.8  | 16,616.1  | 2.0%  | 4.1%  | 8.2%  | 37.8%   
2025  | 706.6  | 35,977.6  | 374.7  | 18,546.7  | 2.3%  | 3.0%  | 7.8%  | 38.4%   
2026  | 734.4  | 37,237.9  | 391.8  | 19,258.7  | 2.4%  | 3.0%  | 7.4%  | 38.8%   
2027  | 763.6  | 38,791.8  | 408.8  | 20,010.3  | 2.5%  | 3.0%  | 7.2%  | 38.5%   
2028  | 793.9  | 40,104.8  | 426.9  | 20,787.3  | 2.5%  | 3.0%  | 7.2%  | 38.5%   
2029  | 825.3  | 41,787.2  | 445.1  | 21,567.2  | 2.5%  | 3.0%  | 7.2%  | 38.5%   
  
### GDP composition

Main macroeconomic aggregates of GDP.

Aggregate | 2015  
(millions of CLP$) | % | Change  
year-on-year (%)  
---|---|---|---  
Private consumption | 101,141,482 | 64.4 | 1.5   
Government consumption | 21,103,758 | 13.4 | 5.8   
Changes in inventories | −391,923 | −0.2 | —   
Gross fixed capital formation | 35,707,922 | 22.7 | −1.5   
(Exports) | (47,221,915) | (30.1) | −1.9   
(Imports) | (47,652,270) | (30.3) | −2.8   
Exports _minus_ Imports | −430,355 | −0.3 | —   
GDP | 157,130,884 | 100.0 | 2.1   
  
Note: Data are preliminary. Source: Cuentas Nacionales de Chile – Evolución de
la actividad económica en el año 2015 (p. 29), Central Bank of Chile, accessed
on 23 March 2016.

### GDP by sector

Gross domestic product by sector of the economy.

Sector | 2011  
(millions of CLP$) | %   
---|---|---  
Agriculture and forestry | **3,328,749** | **2.8**  
Fishing | **424,545** | **0.4**  
Mining

    Copper
    Other
| **18,262,657**  
16,190,770  
2,071,888  | **15.2**  
13.5  
1.7  
Manufacturing industry

    Foodstuff
    Beverage and tobacco
    Textile, clothing and leather
    Wood and furniture
    Cellulose, paper and printing
    Oil refinement
    Chemical, rubber and plastic
    Non-metallic mineral products and basic metals
    Metallic products, machinery, equipment and others
| **13,129,927**  
3,123,930  
1,898,666  
315,070  
419,276  
1,593,821  
964,591  
1,963,145  
858,837  
1,992,590  | **10.9**  
2.6  
1.6  
0.3  
0.3  
1.3  
0.8  
1.6  
0.7  
1.7  
Electricity, gas and water | **2,829,820** | **2.4**  
Construction | **8,916,291** | **7.4**  
Retail | **9,467,766** | **7.9**  
Restaurants and hotels | **1,917,615** | **1.6**  
Transportation | **4,906,137** | **4.1**  
Communications | **2,319,387** | **1.9**  
Financial services | **5,049,548** | **4.2**  
Business services | **15,655,893** | **13.0**  
Real estate services | **6,021,032** | **5.0**  
Personal services (health, education, and other services) | **12,793,180** | **10.6**  
Public administration | **5,207,342** | **4.3**  
GDP at factor cost | 110,229,891 | 91.7   
VAT taxes | **9,347,632** | **7.8**  
Import duties | **655,081** | **0.5**  
GDP at market prices | 120,232,603 | 100.0   
  
Note: 2011 data are preliminary. Source: Cuentas Nacionales – Evolución de la
actividad económica en el año 2011 (p. 34). Central Bank of Chile. accessed on
22 March 2012.

### Imports and exports

Year  | Goods exports  
(billion US$) | Goods imports  
(in billion US$) | Net trade  
(in billion US$)  
---|---|---|---  
2023  | $94.6  | $79.2  | $15.3   
2020  | $74.0  | $55.1  | $18.9   
2015  | $62.1  | $58.5  | $3.6   
2010  | $71.4  | $55.1  | $16.3   
2000  | $19.2  | $17.0  | $2.2   
1990  | $8.4  | $7.1  | $1.3   
1980  | $4.7  | $5.5  | −$0.8   
  
### Top exports

Chile's exports in 1950–2007.

Chile's top exports in 2013.

Export | Millions of  
US dollars FOB | %   
---|---|---  
Mining | 43,937 | 49.11   
Copper | 40,158 | 44.88   
Cathodes | 18,804 | 21.02   
Concentrates | 16,883 | 18.87   
Gold | 1,384 | 1.55   
Iron | 1,379 | 1.54   
Silver | 379 | 0.42   
Lithium carbonate | 226 | 0.25   
Molybdenum concentrate | 178 | 0.20   
Sea salt and table salt | 120 | 0.13   
Agriculture, silviculture and fishing | 5,749 | 6.43   
Fruit sector | 4,738 | 5.30   
Grape | 1,605 | 1.79   
Apple | 843 | 0.94   
Vaccinium | 461 | 0.52   
Cherry | 391 | 0.44   
Kiwifruit | 245 | 0.27   
Avocado | 185 | 0.21   
Pear | 168 | 0.19   
Plum | 152 | 0.17   
Other agriculture | 830 | 0.93   
Corn kernel | 361 | 0.40   
Vegetable seed | 158 | 0.18   
Extractive fishing | 149 | 0.17   
Silviculture sector | 33 | 0.04   
Industrial | 26,997 | 30.17   
Foodstuff | 8,298 | 9.28   
Salmon | 2,772 | 3.10   
Trout | 766 | 0.86   
Mollusks and crustaceans | 498 | 0.56   
Pork | 454 | 0.51   
Fish meal | 418 | 0.47   
Dried fruit | 383 | 0.43   
Frozen fruit | 337 | 0.38   
Poultry meat | 276 | 0.31   
Fruit juice | 240 | 0.27   
Canned fruit | 156 | 0.17   
Fish oil | 109 | 0.12   
Hake | 107 | 0.12   
Canned fish | 53 | 0.06   
Chemical products | 5,447 | 6.09   
Fertilizers | 860 | 0.96   
Iodine | 839 | 0.94   
Molybdenum oxide | 761 | 0.85   
Tires | 393 | 0.44   
Potassium nitrate | 296 | 0.33   
Methanol | 56 | 0.06   
Cellulose, paper and other | 3,607 | 4.03   
Bleached and semi-bleached eucalyptus pulp | 1,262 | 1.41   
Bleached and semi-bleached coniferous pulp | 1,261 | 1.41   
Cardboard | 329 | 0.37   
Raw coniferous pulp | 281 | 0.31   
Metallic products, machinery and equipment | 2,796 | 3.12   
Machinery and equipment | 1,416 | 1.58   
Transport material | 879 | 0.98   
Metallic manufactures | 500 | 0.56   
Beverage and tobacco | 2,407 | 2.69   
Bottled wine | 1,560 | 1.74   
Bulk wine and others | 417 | 0.47   
Non-alcoholic beverages | 297 | 0.33   
Forestry and wood furniture | 2,272 | 2.54   
Lumber | 814 | 0.91   
Wood fibreboards | 350 | 0.39   
Woodchips | 315 | 0.35   
Profiled timber | 273 | 0.31   
Plywood | 254 | 0.28   
Basic metals industry | 1,106 | 1.24   
Copper wire | 457 | 0.51   
Ferromolybdenum | 223 | 0.25   
Other industrial products | 1,064 | 1.19   
Goods total | 76,684 | 85.71   
Transport | 6,357 | 7.11   
Travel | 2,219 | 2.48   
Others | 4,211 | 4.71   
Services total | 12,787 | 14.29   
Total exports | 89,471 | 100.00   
  
Source: Central Bank of Chile's statistics database.