| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( April 2023)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy of Venezuela** is based primarily on petroleum, as the country
holds the largest crude oil supply in the world. Venezuela was historically
among the wealthiest economies in South America, particularly from the 1950s
to 1980s. During the 21st century, under the leadership of socialist populist
Hugo Chávez and his successor Nicolás Maduro, the Venezuelan economy has
collapsed, prompting millions of citizens to flee Venezuela. GDP has fallen by
80 percent in less than a decade. The economy is characterized by corruption,
food shortages, unemployment, mismanagement of the oil sector, and since 2014,
hyperinflation. As of 2024, inflation has stabilized at 59.61%.

Venezuela is the 25th largest producer of oil in the world and the 8th largest
member of OPEC. Venezuela also manufactures and exports heavy industry
products such as steel, aluminum, and cement. Other notable manufacturing
includes electronics and automobiles as well as beverages and foodstuffs.
Agriculture in Venezuela accounts for approximately 4.7% of GDP, 7.3% of the
labor force and at least one-fourth of Venezuela's land area. Venezuela
exports rice, corn, fish, tropical fruit, coffee, pork and beef. Venezuela has
an estimated US$14.3 trillion worth of natural resources and is not self-
sufficient in most areas of agriculture. Exports accounted for 16.7% of GDP
and petroleum products accounted for about 95% of those exports.

Since the 1920s, Venezuela has been a rentier state, offering oil as its main
export. From the 1950s to the early 1980s, the Venezuelan economy experienced
a steady growth that attracted many immigrants, with the nation enjoying the
highest standard of living in Latin America. The situation reversed when oil
prices collapsed during the 1980s. Hugo Chavez became president in 1999 and
implemented a form of socialism (the Bolivarian Revolution) that resulted in
the collapse or nationalization of many Venezuelan businesses, and purged the
state-run PDVSA oil company, replacing thousands of workers with political
supporters with no technical expertise. The Chavez administration also imposed
stringent currency controls in 2003 in an attempt to prevent capital flight.
These actions resulted in a decline in oil production and exports and a series
of stern currency devaluations.

Price controls and expropriation of numerous farmlands and various industries
are government policies along with a near-total freeze on any access to
foreign currency at reasonable "official" exchange rates. These have resulted
in severe shortages in Venezuela and steep price rises of all common goods,
including food, water, household products, spare parts, tools and medical
supplies; forcing many manufacturers to either cut production or close down,
with many ultimately abandoning the country as has been the case with several
technological firms and most automobile makers.

Venezuela's economy has been in a state of total economic collapse since 2013.
In 2015, Venezuela had over 100% inflation—the highest in the world and the
highest in the country's history at that time. According to independent
sources, the rate increased to 80,000% at the end of 2018 with Venezuela
spiraling into hyperinflation while the poverty rate was nearly 90 percent of
the population. On 14 November 2017, credit rating agencies declared that
Venezuela was in default with its debt payments, with Standard & Poor's
categorizing Venezuela as being in "selective default".

The United States has been Venezuela's most important trading partner despite
the strained relations between the two countries. American exports to
Venezuela have included machinery, agricultural products, medical instruments
and cars. Venezuela is one of the top four suppliers of foreign oil to the
United States. About 500 American companies are represented in Venezuela.
According to the Central Bank of Venezuela, between 1998 and 2008 the
government received around US$325 billion through oil production and exports
in general.[17] According to the International Energy Agency (as of August
2015), the production of 2.4 million barrels per day supplied 500,000 barrels
to the United States.[18] A report published by Transparencia Venezuela in
2022 estimated that illegal activities in the country made up around 21% of
its GDP.

## 2020-present

> Almost 82% of Venezuelans live in poverty, with 53% in extreme poverty,
> unable to buy even basic foodstuffs.
>
> – A UN special reporter said in February 2024 after visiting the country.

Venezuela was “once among South America's wealthiest countries” before the
economic meltdown under Maduro regime.

“The formerly rich petro-state has seen GDP fall by 80% in less than a decade,
driving some seven million of its citizens to flee. Most Venezuelans live on
just a few dollars a month, with the health care and education systems in
total disrepair and biting shortages of electricity and fuel” as of 2024,
according to VOA (report from AFP).

A report published by Transparencia Venezuela in 2022 estimated that illegal
activities in the country made up around 21% of its GDP. According to the
report, drug, oil and gold trafficking, as well as illegal activities in ports
and customs had generated over 9.4 billion dollars for organized crime
protected by corrupt officials. In 2021, gold extraction generated around 2.3
billion dollars, of which the State received only 25%.

By 2023, the economic situation of Venezuela improved, with the economy
growing by 15% and extreme poverty rates decreasing, thanks to a liberalized
economy and more access to the United States dollar. However, inequality is
high, with wealthy Venezuelans making more than 70 times the poorest ones. In
2024 inflation cooled to 1.7% monthly after injection of Chevron dollars—the
lowest in a decade.

## History

| This section **needs expansion** with: Economic history of Venezuela dating
back to independence. You can help by adding to it. Relevant discussion may be
found on the talk page. _( April 2021)_  
---|---  
  
### 1922–1959

After oil was discovered in Venezuela in 1922 during the Maracaibo strike,
Venezuela's dictator Juan Vicente Gómez allowed American oil companies to
write Venezuela's petroleum law. In 1943, Standard Oil of New Jersey accepted
a new agreement in Venezuela based on the 50–50 principle, described as "a
landmark event". Even more favorable terms were negotiated in 1945, after a
coup brought to power a left-leaning government that included Juan Pablo Pérez
Alfonso.

From the 1950s to the early 1980s, the Venezuelan economy, which was buoyed by
high oil prices, was one of the strongest and most prosperous in South
America. The continuous growth during that period attracted many immigrants.

In 1958, a new government, again including Pérez Alfonso, devised a plan for
an international oil cartel, that would become OPEC.

During Pérez Jiménez' dictatorship from 1952 to 1958, Venezuela enjoyed
remarkably high GDP growth, so that in the late 1950s Venezuela's real GDP per
capita almost reached that of Ireland or West Germany. Albeit, West Germany
was still recovering from WW2 destruction of German infrastructure. In 1950,
Venezuela was the world's 4th wealthiest nation per capita. However, Rómulo
Betancourt, president from 1959 to 1964, inherited from 1958 to 1959 onward an
enormous internal and external debt caused by rampant public spending. He
managed to balance Venezuela's public budget and initiate an agrarian reform.

### 1960s–1990s

Buoyed by a strong oil sector in the 1960s and 1970s, Venezuela's governments
were able to maintain social harmony by spending fairly large amounts on
public programs including health care, education, transport and food
subsidies. Literacy and welfare programs benefited tremendously from these
conditions. The first tenure of Carlos Andrés Pérez from 1974 to 1979
benefited from the 1970s energy crisis, tripling the amount of public spending
and nationalizing the oil industry, establishing PDVSA. He also increased
government debt significantly, nationalized the iron industry, created new
state-owned companies, nationalized the central bank and replaced its board
with cabinet members, eliminating the bank's independence as a result. His
government was also allowed to establish the first minimum wage and salary
increases with an enabling act approved by the National Congress. Pérez was
accused of excessive and disorderly public spending. Venezuela's external debt
grew from $2 billion in 1972 to $33 billion by 1982.

Venezuela's economic situation was reversed when oil prices collapsed during
the 1980s. Luis Herrera Campins was elected just as the oil prices collapsed,
with the economy experiencing turmoil throughout his tenure. The economy
contracted and inflation levels (consumer price inflation) rose, remaining
between 6 and 12% from 1982 to 1986. Policies implemented by Herrera to reduce
inflation and reverse increased government spending were not effective,
resulting with the election of Jaime Lusinchi in the 1983 Venezuelan general
election. The Lusinchi administration continued strict foreign exchange
controls and excessive spending while oil prices continued to decrease.
Lusinchi focused the nation's funds on paying foreign debtors, sending $15
billion out to international lenders from 1985 to 1988 to tend the remaining
$32 billion of debt. By the end of his presidency, the public began to suffer
from inflated prices and shortages of basic goods.

People looting stores during the Caracazo in 1989

Carlos Andrés Pérez based his campaign for the 1988 Venezuelan general
election in his legacy of abundance during his first presidential period and
initially rejected liberalization policies. Venezuela's international reserves
were only US$300 million at the time of Pérez' election into the presidency;
Pérez decided to respond to the debt, public spending, economic restrictions
and rentier state by liberalizing the economy. He announced a technocratic
cabinet and a group of economic policies to fix macroeconomic imbalances known
as _El Gran Viraje [es]_ (English: The Great Turn), called by detractors as
_El Paquetazo Económico_ (English: The Economic Package). Among the policies
there was the reduction of fuel subsidies and the increase of public
transportation fares by thirty percent (VEB 16 Venezuelan bolívares, or
US$0.4). The increase was supposed to be implemented on 1 March 1989, but bus
drivers decided to apply the price rise on 27 February, a day before payday in
Venezuela. In response, protests and rioting began on the morning of 27
February 1989 in Guarenas, a town near Caracas; a lack of timely intervention
by authorities, as the Caracas Metropolitan Police [es] was on a labor strike,
led to the protests and rioting quickly spreading to the capital and other
towns across the country.

CANTV's old logo, state telecommunications company privatized in 1991.

By late 1991, as part of the economic reforms, Carlos Andrés Pérez'
administration had sold three banks, a shipyard, two sugar mills, an airline,
a telephone company and a cell phone band, receiving a total of US$2,287
million. The most remarkable auction was CANTV's, a telecommunications
company, which was sold at the price of US$1,885 million to the consortium
composed of American AT&T International, General Telephone Electronic and the
Venezuelan Electricidad de Caracas and Banco Mercantil. The privatization
ended Venezuela's monopoly over telecommunications and surpassed even the most
optimistic predictions, with over US$1,000 million above the base price and
US$500 million more than the bid offered by the competition group. By the end
of the year, inflation had dropped from 84% in 1989 to 31%, Venezuela's
international reserves were now worth US$14,000 million and there was an
economic growth of 9% (called as an "Asian growth"), the largest in Latin
America at the time. While foreign debtors were repaid and the economy grew,
by 1992, the majority of economic benefits were experienced by the upper class
while middle to lower classes faced increased poverty and high unemployment
rates between ten and forty percent.[_verification needed_][_verification
needed_][_verification needed_]

Overreliance on oil exports and a fractured political system without parties
agreeing on policies caused many of the problems. By the mid-1990s, Venezuela
under President Rafael Caldera saw annual inflation rates of 50–60% from 1993
to 1997, with the country suffering a banking crisis. In 1998, the economic
crisis had grown even worse. Per capita GDP was at the same level as 1963
(after adjusting 1963 dollar to 1998 value), down a third from its 1978 peak;
and the purchasing power of the average salary was a third of its 1978 level.

### 1999–2013

Hugo Chávez was elected President in December 1998 and took office in February
1999. From 1999 to the end of 2012, when Hugo Chavez health decayed preventing
him from fulfilling any presidential duties, the GDP grew from 97.52 billion
dollars to 372.59 billion dollars. In the same period, inflation remained
stable around 20% year.

From 1999 In 2000, oil prices soared, offering Chávez funds not seen since
Venezuela's economic collapse in the 1980s. Chávez implemented economic
policies that leaned toward social democracy, utilizing oil revenues to fund
social programs. These policies increased Venezuela's economic reliance on
high oil prices.

During the first four years of Chávez's presidency, the economy initially grew
between 1999 and 2001 but contracted from 2001 to 2003, returning to GDP
levels similar to those of 1997. The early decline was influenced by low oil
prices and later exacerbated by the events surrounding the 2002 coup attempt
and the 2002–2003 general strike. Additional contributing factors included
capital flight and reduced foreign investment. GDP decreased from 50.0
trillion bolívares in 1998 to 42.4 trillion bolívares in 2003 (measured in
constant 1998 bolívares).

The hardest-hit sectors in the worst recession years (2002–2003) were
construction (−55.9%), petroleum (−26.5%), commerce (−23.6%) and manufacturing
(−22.5%). The drop in the petroleum sector was caused by adherence to the OPEC
quota established in 2002 and the virtual cessation of exports during the
PdVSA-led general strike of 2002–2003. The non-petroleum sector of the economy
contracted by 6.5% in 2002. The bolívar, which had been suffering from serious
inflation and devaluation relative to international standards since the late
1980s, stabilized around 20% inflation.

During Chávez's presidency, inflation was significantly reduced and maintained
at an average of around 20%, marking a substantial improvement compared to the
late 1980s and the turbulent 1990s, when inflation reached its highest point
at 100% in 1996. The inflation rate, as measured by the consumer price index,
stood at 35.8% in 1998, dropped to a low of 12.5% in 2001, and rose to 31.1%
in 2003. In response to pressures on the bolívar, declining international
reserves, and the economic impact of the oil industry work stoppage, the
Ministry of Finance and the central bank suspended foreign exchange trading on
January 23, 2003. Shortly afterward, the government established CADIVI, a
currency control board, on February 6, 2003. CADIVI regulated foreign exchange
procedures and set the exchange rate at 1,596 bolívares per US dollar for
purchases and 1,600 bolívares per US dollar for sales.

The housing market in Venezuela shrunk significantly with developers avoiding
Venezuela due to the massive number of companies who have had their property
expropriated by the government. According to The Heritage Foundation and _The
Wall Street Journal_ , Venezuela had the weakest property rights in the world,
scoring only 5.0 on a scale of 100, with expropriation without compensation
being common. The housing shortage in Venezuela was significant enough that,
in 2007, a group of squatters occupied the Centro Financiero Confinanzas, an
unfinished economic complex originally intended to represent the country's
economic growth.

The Venezuelan economy contracted by 5.8% in the first quarter of 2010
compared to the same period in 2009 and recorded the highest inflation rate in
Latin America at 30.5%. President Chávez expressed optimism about Venezuela's
recovery, although the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected that
Venezuela would be the only country in the region to remain in recession that
year. The IMF described Venezuela's economic recovery as "delayed and weak"
compared to other countries in the region.

Nevertheless, the Venezuelan economy resumed a growth trend in subsequent
years, continuing until 2012. The economic downturn began during Nicolás
Maduro's leadership, as Chávez’s health declined and he became increasingly
unable to govern effectively.

### 2013–2020

Shortages in Venezuela leave store shelves empty

According to the misery index in 2013, Venezuela ranked as the top spot
globally with the highest misery index score. The International Finance
Corporation ranked Venezuela one of the lowest countries for doing business
with, ranking it 180 of 185 countries for its _Doing Business 2013_ report
with protecting investors and taxes being its worst rankings. In early 2013,
the bolívar fuerte was devalued due to growing shortages in Venezuela. The
shortages included necessities such as toilet paper, milk and flour. Shortages
also affected healthcare in Venezuela, with the University of Caracas Medical
Hospital ceasing to perform surgeries due to the lack of supplies in 2014. The
Bolivarian government's policies also made it difficult to import drugs and
other medical supplies. Due to such complications, many Venezuelans died
avoidable deaths with medical professionals having to use limited resources
using methods that were replaced decades ago.

An opposition protester during the 2014 Venezuelan protests holding a sign
saying: "I protest for the scarcity. Where can we get these?"

In 2014, Venezuela entered an economic recession having its GDP growth decline
to −3.0%. Venezuela was placed at the top of the misery index for the second
year in a row. _The Economist_ said Venezuela was "probably the world's worst-
managed economy". Citibank believed that "the economy has little prospect of
improvement" and that the state of the Venezuelan economy was a "disaster".
The _Doing Business 2014_ report by the International Finance Corporation and
the World Bank ranked Venezuela one score lower than the previous year, then
181 out of 185. The Heritage Foundation ranked Venezuela 175th out of 178
countries in economic freedom for 2014, classifying it as a "repressed"
economy according to the principles the foundation advocates. According to
_Foreign Policy_ , Venezuela was ranked last in the world on its Base Yield
Index due to low returns that investors receive when investing in Venezuela.
In a 2014 report titled _Scariest Places on the Business Frontiers_ by Zurich
Financial Services and reported by _Bloomberg_ , Venezuela was ranked as the
riskiest emerging market in the world. Many companies such as Toyota, Ford
Motor Co., General Motors Company, Air Canada, Air Europa, American Airlines,
Copa Airlines, TAME, TAP Airlines and United Airlines slowed or stopped
operation due to the lack of hard currency in the country, with Venezuela
owing such foreign companies billions of dollars. Venezuela also dismantled
CADIVI, a government body in charge of currency exchange. CADIVI was known for
holding money from the private sector and was suspected to be corrupt.

Venezuelans eating from garbage in late 2015

Venezuela again topped the misery index according to the World Bank in 2015.
The IMF predicted in October 2015 an inflation rate of 159% for the year
2015—the highest rate in Venezuelan history and the highest rate in the
world—and that the economy would contract by 10%. According to leaked
documents from the Central Bank of Venezuela, the country ended 2015 with an
inflation rate of 270% and a shortage rate of goods over 70%.

President Nicolás Maduro reorganized his economic cabinet in 2016 with the
group mainly consisting of leftist Venezuelan academics. According to Bank of
America's investment division Merrill Lynch, Maduro's new cabinet was expected
to tighten currency and price controls in the country. Alejandro Werner, the
head of IMF's Latin American Department, stated that 2015 figures released by
the Central Bank of Venezuela were not accurate and that Venezuela's inflation
for 2015 was 275%. Other forecast inflation figures by IMF and Bank of America
were 720% and 1,000% in 2016, Analysts believed that the Venezuelan government
has been manipulating economic statistics, especially since they did not
report adequate data since late 2014. According to economist Steve Hanke of
Johns Hopkins University, the Central Bank of Venezuela delayed the release of
statistics and lied about figures much like the Soviet Union did, with Hanke
saying that a lie coefficient had to be used to observe Venezuela's economic
data.

By 2016, media outlets said that Venezuela was suffering an economic collapse
with the IMF saying that it expected it to reach a 500% inflation rate and 10%
contraction in the GDP. In December 2016, monthly inflation exceeded 50
percent for the 30th consecutive day, meaning the Venezuelan economy was
officially experiencing hyperinflation, making it the 57th country to be added
to the Hanke-Krus World Hyperinflation Table.

On 25 August 2017, it was reported that new United States sanctions against
Venezuela did not ban trading of the country's existing non-government bonds,
with the sanctions instead including restrictions intended to block the
government's ability to fund itself.

On 26 January 2018, the government ended the protected, subsidized fixed
exchange rate mechanism that was highly overvalued as a result of rampant
inflation. The National Assembly (led by the opposition) said inflation in
2017 was over 4,000%, a level other independent economists also agreed with.
In February, the government launched an oil-backed cryptocurrency called the
petro.

Bloomberg's Cafe Con Leche Index calculated the price increase for a cup of
coffee to have increased by 718% in the 12 weeks before 18 January 2018, an
annualized inflation rate of 448,000%. The finance commission of the National
Assembly noted in July 2018 that prices were doubling every 28 days with an
annualized inflation rate of 25,000%.

The country was heading for a selective default in 2017. In early 2018, the
country was in default, meaning it could not pay its lenders.

On 24 August 2017 President Trump imposed sanctions on the state debt of
Venezuela which ban to make transactions with state debt of Venezuela
including the participation in debt restructuring. On 13 November 2017 the
technical default period ended and Venezuela did not pay coupons on its dollar
eurobonds. This caused a cross default on other dollar bonds. On 30 November
ISDA committee consisting of 15 biggest banks admitted default on state debt
obligations what in its turn entailed payments on CDS. According to Cbonds,
nowadays there are 20 international Venezuelan bonds which are recognized in
default. The overall amount of defaulted obligations is equal to 36 billion
dollars.

## Sectors

Under the tenures of Hugo Chávez and his successor Nicolás Maduro, many
businesses abandoned Venezuela. In 1999, there were 13,000 companies in the
country. By 2016, less than a third of companies remained in Venezuela, with
only 4,000 companies operating in the nation.

### Petroleum and other resources

A map of world oil reserves according to OPEC, 2013 Oil production in
Venezuela (red) fell markedly between 2015 and 2020

Venezuela has the world's largest proven oil reserves, totaling 302.81 billion
barrels at the end of 2017. The country is a major producer of petroleum
products, which remain the keystone of the Venezuelan economy. The
International Energy Agency shows how Venezuela's oil production has fallen in
the last years, producing only 2,300,000 barrels (370,000 m3) daily, down from
3.5 million in 1998. However, the oil incomes will double its value in local
currency with the recent currency devaluation. Venezuela has large energy
subsidies. In 2015, the cost of petrol was just US$0.06 per gallon, costing
23% of government revenues. In February 2016, the government finally decided
to raise the price, but only to 6 bolívar (about 60¢ at the official rate of
exchange) per litre for premium and just 1 bolívar (10¢) for lower-grade
petrol.

A range of other natural resources, including iron ore, coal, bauxite, gold,
nickel and diamonds, are in various stages of development and production. In
April 2000, Venezuela's president decreed a new mining law and regulations
were adopted to encourage greater private sector participation in mineral
extraction. During Venezuela's economic crisis, the rate of gold excavated
fell 64.1% between February 2013 and February 2014 and iron production dropped
49.8%. In the production of gold, until 2009 the country produced an annual
average between 11 and 12 tons per year. After that, due to the political and
economic problems, mining activity plummeted: in 2017 the country only
extracted 0.48 ton.

Venezuela mostly utilizes hydropower resources to supply power to the nation's
industries, accounting for 57% of total consumption at the end of 2016.
However, persistent drought has severely reduced energy production from
hydropower resources. The national electricity law is designed to provide a
legal framework and to encourage competition and new investment in the
sector.[_citation needed_] After a two-year delay, the government is
proceeding with plans to privatize the various state-owned electricity systems
under a different scheme than previously envisioned.[_citation needed_]

### Manufacturing

| This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( September
2010)_  
---|---  
  
Manufacturing contributed 12% of GDP in 2014. The manufacturing sector is
experiencing severe difficulties, amidst lack of investment and accusations of
mismanagement. Venezuela manufactures and exports steel, aluminum, transport
equipment, textiles, apparel, beverages and foodstuffs. It produces cement,
tires, paper, fertilizer and assembles cars both for domestic and export
markets.

In 2014, General Motors Venezolana stopped automotive production after 65
years of service due to a lack of supplies while the Central Bank of Venezuela
announced that the shortage rate of new automobiles was at 100%. By the first
half of 2016, only 10 vehicles were manufactured per day in Venezuela with
production dropping 86%.

In 2017, estimates showed that Venezuela's industrial production fell about
2%.

### Agriculture

Agriculture in Venezuela accounts for approximately 3% of GDP, 10% of the
labor force, and at least a quarter of Venezuela's land area. Venezuela
exports rice, corn, fish, tropical fruit, coffee, beef and pork. The country
is not self-sufficient in most areas of agriculture. Venezuela imports about
two-thirds of its food needs. In 2002, American firms exported $347 million
worth of agricultural products, including wheat, corn, soybeans, soybean meal,
cotton, animal fats, vegetable oils and other items to make Venezuela one of
the top two American markets in South America. The United States supplies more
than one-third of Venezuela's food imports. Recent government policies have
led to problems with food shortages. During times of high oil revenues
domestic agriculture was neglected in favor of imported products, but when oil
revenues fell and the currency experienced hyperinflation, the cost of
acquiring those imported goods became prohibitive for most Venezuelans.

Venezuela produced in 2019:

  * 4.3 million tons of sugarcane;
  * 1.9 million tons of maize;
  * 1.4 million tons of banana;
  * 760 thousand tons of rice;
  * 485 thousand tons of pineapple;
  * 477 thousand tons of potato;
  * 435 thousand tons of palm oil;
  * 421 thousand tons of cassava;
  * 382 thousand tons of orange;
  * 225 thousand tons of watermelon;
  * 199 thousand tons of papaya;
  * 194 thousand tons of melon;
  * 182 thousand tons of tomatoes;
  * 155 thousand tons of tangerine;
  * 153 thousand tons of coconut;
  * 135 thousand tons of avocado;
  * 102 thousand tons of mango (including mangosteen and guava);
  * 56 thousand tons of coffee;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products. Due to
internal economic and political problems, sugar cane production dropped from
7.3 million tons in 2012 to 3.6 million in 2016. Corn production dropped from
2.3 million tons in 2014 to 1.2 million in 2017. Rice fell from 1.15 million
tons in 2014 to 498 thousand tons in 2016.

### Livestock

In livestock, Venezuela produced, in 2019: 470 thousand tons of beef, 454
thousand tons of chicken meat, 129 thousand tons of pork, 1.7 billion liters
of cow's milk, among others. The production of chicken meat decreased
progressively, from year to year, from 1.1 million tons in 2011 to 448
thousand tons in 2017. The production of pork fell from 219 thousand tons in
2011 to 124 thousand tons in 2018. The production of cow's milk dropped from
2.4 billion liters in 2011 to 1.7 billion in 2019.

## Trade

Venezuela private sector nonpetroleum exports in millions of US$ from 1997 to
2015 (orange=goods, yellow=services)

Venezuela is a founding member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC), the Organization of Gas Exporting Countries (GECF), the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA) and the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC). Petroleum constitutes 80% of
Venezuela's exports with a value of $22.2 billion in 2017. Thanks to petroleum
exports, Venezuela usually posts a trade surplus. From 2005, nontraditional
(i.e. nonpetroleum) private sector exports have been declining rapidly. By
2015, they constitute 8% of total exports. The United States is Venezuela's
leading trade partner. During 2002, the United States exported $4.4 billion in
goods to Venezuela, making it the 25th-largest market for the United States
Including petroleum products, Venezuela exported $15.1 billion in goods to the
United States, making it its 14th-largest source of goods. Venezuela opposes
the proposed Free Trade Area of the Americas.[_citation needed_]

Since 1998, China–Venezuela relations have seen an increasing partnership
between the government of the Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez and the
People's Republic of China. Sino-Venezuelan trade was less than $500m per year
before 1999 and reached $7.5bn in 2009, making China Venezuela's second-
largest trade partner and Venezuela China's biggest investment destination in
Latin America. Various bilateral deals have seen China invest billions in
Venezuela and Venezuela increase exports of oil and other resources to China.
China has demanded payment in oil for its exports to Venezuela because of its
unwillingness to accept Venezuelan currency and the inability of Venezuela to
pay in dollars or gold.[_citation needed_]

Top Trading Partners for Venezuela for 2017  
---  
| Imports into Venezuela 2017  
---  
Ranking | Country | Value (USD) | %   
| World | $9.1B | 100.0%   
1 |  United States | $3.45B | 38%   
2 |  China | $1.65B | 18%   
3 |  Mexico | $1.08B | 12%   
4 |  Brazil | $469M | 5.2%   
5 |  Colombia | $318M | 3.5%   
6 |  Argentina | $245M | 2.7%   
7 |  Germany | $191M | 2.1%   
8 |  Italy | $166M | 1.8%   
9 |  Spain | $117M | 1.3%   
10 |  United Kingdom | $86M | 0.95%   
| Exports from Venezuela for 2017  
---  
Ranking | Country | Value (USD) | %   
| World | $27.8B | 100.0%   
1 |  United States | $11.6B | 42%   
2 |  China | $6.4B | 23%   
3 |  India | $5.25B | 19%   
4 |  Singapore | $1.25B | 4,5%   
5 |  Spain | $390M | 1,4%   
6 |  Brazil | $363M | 1.3%   
7 |  Sweden | $341M | 1.2%   
8 |  Malaysia | $316M | 1.1%   
9 |  Germany | $259M | 0.93%   
10 |  Colombia | $210M | 0.75%   
  
## Labor

| This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( September
2010)_  
---|---  
  
Under Chávez, Venezuela has also instituted worker-run "co-management"
initiatives in which workers' councils play a key role in the management of a
plant or factory. In experimental co-managed enterprises, such as the state-
owned Alcasa factory, workers develop budgets and elect both managers and
departmental delegates who work together with company executives on technical
issues related to production.

In November 2010, workers spent a week protesting outside factories in Valera
and Valencia following the expropriation of the American bottle-maker Owens-
Illinois.

Labor disputes have continued to increase since the financial crisis in 2008.
According to the World Economic Forum, Venezuela is ranked as 134th of the 148
countries for economic competitiveness. Many in the private sector attribute
these findings to the inflexible labor market.

In recent years, a barrage of pro-worker decrees have been passed. The most
significant could be the 2012 labor laws known as the LOTTT. These laws
included the virtual ban on dismissal, shorter work week, improved holidays
and enhanced maternity benefits. The LOTTT offers job security to most workers
after the first month. Employers have reported an absenteeism rate of up to
40% which they blame on the leniency of these labor laws. As expected,
employers have been less willing to recruit.

On 17 November 2014, President Maduro issued a decree to increase the minimum
salary for all workers by 15%. The decree became effective on 1 December 2014.
As part of the May Day celebrations in honor of workers' day, President Maduro
announced on 28 April 2015 that the minimum wage would increase 30%; 20% in
May and 10% in July, with the newly announced minimum wage for Venezuelans
being only about $30 per month at the widely used black market rate.

In September 2017, the National Union of Workers (UNETE) announced that
Venezuela had lost 3,345,000 jobs since the election of President Maduro. By
December 2017, the number of lost jobs increased by 400,000 to over 3,850,000
lost jobs since the start of Maduro's tenure.

## Infrastructure

In the 20th century when Venezuela benefitted from oil sales, infrastructure
flourished in Venezuela. However, in recent years Venezuela's public services
and infrastructure has suffered, especially utilities such as electricity and
water.

### Transportation

Venezuela has an extensive road system that was initially created in the 1960s
helped aid the oil and aluminum industries. The capital Caracas had a modern
subway system designed by the French that was finished in 1995, with the
subway tunneling more than 31.6 mi (50.9 km).

In 1870, Antonio Guzmán Blanco helped create Venezuela's railway system.

The Chavez government launched a National Railway Development Plan designed to
create 15 railway lines across the country, with 13,700 kilometres (8,500 mi)
of track by 2030. The network is being built in cooperation with China
Railways, which is also cooperating with Venezuela to create factories for
tracks, railway cars and eventually locomotives. However, Venezuela's rail
project is being put on hold due to Venezuela not being able to pay the $7.5
billion and owing China Railway nearly $500 million.

Lufthansa said it would stop all flights to Venezuela on 18 June 2016, citing
difficulties with currency controls. Other airlines also cut back on flights
and required that passengers pay fares in US$.

### Energy

The Venezuelan electrical grid is plagued with occasional blackouts in various
districts of the country. In 2011, it had so many problems that rations on
electricity were put in place to help ease blackouts. On 3 September 2013, 70%
of the country plunged into darkness with 14 of 23 states of Venezuela stating
they did not have electricity for most of the day. Another power outage on 2
December 2013 left most of Venezuela in the dark again and happened just days
before elections.

#### Energy statistics

  * Electricity – production by source: 
    * Fossil fuel: 35.7% (2012 est.)
    * Hydroelectric 64.3 (2012 est.)
    * Nuclear: 0% (2012 est.)
    * Other: 0% (2012 est.)
  * Electricity production: 127.6 billion kWh (2012 est.)
  * Electricity – consumption: 85.05 billion kWh (2011 est.)
  * Electricity – exports: 633 million kWh (2009 est.)
  * Electricity – imports: 260 million kWh (2009 est.)
  * Electricity – installed generating capacity: 27.5 million kW (2012 est.)

## Statistics

### Economy data

The blue line represents annual rates whereas the red line represents trends
of annual rates given throughout the period shown (sources: International
Monetary Fund, World Bank and Central Intelligence Agency)

The Macroeconomic Stabilization Fund (FIEM) decreased from US$2.59 billion in
January 2003 to US$700 million in October, but central bank-held international
reserves actually increased from US$11.31 billion in January to US$19.67
billion in October 2003. On the black market, the bolívar fell 28% in 2007 to
Bs. 4,750 per US$ and declined to around VEF 5.5 (Bs 5500) per US$ in early
2009.

The economy recovered and grew by 16.8% in 2004. This growth occurred across a
wide range of sectors—the oil industry directly provides only a small
percentage of employment in the country. International reserves grew to US$27
billion. Polling firm Datanalysis noted that real income in the poorest
sectors of society grew by 33% in 2004.[_citation needed_]

On 7 March 2007, the government announced that the Venezuelan bolívar would be
redenominated at a ratio of 1 to 1,000 at the beginning of 2008 and renamed
the _bolívar fuerte_ ("strong bolivar") to ease accounting and transactions.
This was carried out on 1 January 2008, at which time the exchange rate was
2.15 _bolívar fuerte_ per US$. The ISO 4217 code for the _bolívar fuerte_ is
VEF.

Government spending as a percentage of GDP in Venezuela in 2007 was 30%,
smaller than other mixed economies such as France (49%) and Sweden (52%).
According to official sources from the United Nations, the percentage of
people below the national poverty line has decreased during the presidency of
Hugo Chávez, from 48.1% in 2002 to 28% in 2008.

With the 2007 rise in oil prices and rising government expenditures,
Venezuela's economy grew by 9% in 2007. Oil prices fell starting in July 2008,
resulting in a major loss of income. Hit by a global recession, the economy
contracted by 2% in the second quarter of 2009, contracting a further 4.5% in
the third quarter of 2009. Chavez's response has been that these standards
mis-state economic fact and that the economy should be measured by socialistic
standards. On 17 November, the Central Bank reported that private sector
activity declined by 4.5% and that inflation was averaging 26.7%. Compounding
such problems is a drought which the government says was caused by El Niño,
resulting in rationing of water and electricity and a short supply of food.

The year 2010 saw Venezuela still in recession as GDP has fallen by 5.8% in
the first quarter of 2010. The Central Bank of Venezuela has stated that the
recession is due largely "to restricted access to foreign currency for
imports, lower internal demand and electricity rationing". The oil sector's
performance was also particularly troubling, with oil GDP shrinking by 5%.
More importantly, the Central Bank hints at the root cause of the oil
contraction, saying that "the bank said it was due to falls in production,
"operative problems", maintenance stoppages and the channeling of diesel to
run thermal generators during a power crisis". While the public sector of the
economy has fallen 2.8%, the private sector has dropped off 6%.

The year 2013 proved to be difficult for Venezuela as shortages of necessities
and extreme inflation attacked the nation's economy. Items became so scarce
that nearly one quarter of items were not in stock. The bolívar was devalued
to 6.3 per US$ in early 2013 taking one third of its value away. However,
inflation still continued to rise drastically in the country to the point
President Maduro forced stores to sell their items just days before elections.
Maduro said that the stores were charging unreasonable prices even though the
owners were only charging so much due to the actual devaluation of the
bolívar.

In 2014 The Central Bank of Venezuela stopped releasing statistics for the
first time in its history as a way to possibly manipulate the image of the
economy. Venezuela has also dismantled CADIVI, a government body in charge of
currency exchange.

In May 2019, the Central Bank of Venezuela released economic data for the
first time since 2015. According to this release, the inflation of Venezuela
was 274% in 2016, 863% in 2017 and 130,060% in 2018. The new reports imply a
contraction of more than half of the economy in five years, according to the
_Financial Times_ "one of the biggest contractions in Latin American history".
According two undisclosed sources from _Reuters,_ the release of this numbers
was due to pressure from China, a Maduro ally. One of this sources claims that
the disclosure of economic numbers may bring Venezuela into compliance with
the IMF, making it harder to support Juan Guaidó during the presidential
crisis. At the time, the IMF was not able to support the validity of the data
as they had not been able to contact the authorities.

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2023. Inflation
below 10% is in green.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$nominal) | GDP per capita (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 118.8  | 7,947.4  | 69.8  | 4,671.1  | -4.9%  | 21.4%  | n/a  | n/a   
1981  | 128.4  | 8,332.0  | 78.4  | 5,085.6  | -1.3%  | 16.2%  | n/a  | n/a   
1982  | 139.9  | 8,818.8  | 80.0  | 5,041.6  | 2.6%  | 9.6%  | n/a  | n/a   
1983  | 131.1  | 8,034.2  | 79.7  | 4,883.2  | -9.9%  | 6.2%  | n/a  | n/a   
1984  | 142.9  | 8,519.8  | 57.8  | 3,447.5  | 5.2%  | 12.3%  | n/a  | n/a   
1985  | 148.7  | 8,624.8  | 59.9  | 3,472.2  | 0.9%  | 11.4%  | n/a  | n/a   
1986  | 160.9  | 9,221.6  | 60.9  | 3,488.6  | 6.1%  | 11.5%  | n/a  | n/a   
1987  | 172.8  | 9,660.9  | 46.9  | 2,619.2  | 4.8%  | 28.1%  | n/a  | n/a   
1988  | 190.6  | 10,392.5  | 60.4  | 3,292.8  | 6.5%  | 29.5%  | n/a  | n/a   
1989  | 170.5  | 9,075.0  | 44.7  | 2,378.2  | -13.9%  | 84.5%  | n/a  | n/a   
1990  | 188.3  | 9,699.7  | 48.4  | 2,492.9  | 6.5%  | 40.7%  | n/a  | n/a   
1991  | 213.6  | 10,744.4  | 53.4  | 2,685.3  | 9.7%  | 34.2%  | n/a  | n/a   
1992  | 231.7  | 11,387.3  | 60.4  | 2,968.5  | 6.1%  | 31.4%  | n/a  | n/a   
1993  | 237.8  | 11,426.5  | 59.9  | 2,876.1  | 0.3%  | 38.1%  | n/a  | n/a   
1994  | 237.2  | 11,145.9  | 58.4  | 2,742.0  | -2.3%  | 60.8%  | n/a  | n/a   
1995  | 251.8  | 11,574.8  | 77.4  | 3,559.8  | 4.0%  | 59.9%  | n/a  | n/a   
1996  | 255.9  | 11,515.7  | 70.5  | 3,174.6  | -0.2%  | 99.9%  | n/a  | n/a   
1997  | 276.9  | 12,209.0  | 85.7  | 3,778.5  | 6.4%  | 50.0%  | n/a  | n/a   
1998  | 280.8  | 12,139.9  | 91.8  | 3,970.4  | 0.3%  | 35.8%  | n/a  | 26.3%   
1999  | 267.8  | 11,349.0  | 97.5  | 4,133.4  | -6.0%  | 23.6%  | 14.5%  | 24.7%   
2000  | 283.9  | 11,638.6  | 117.6  | 4,820.6  | 3.7%  | 16.2%  | 14.0%  | 19.1%   
2001  | 300.2  | 12,102.0  | 123.1  | 4,963.9  | 3.4%  | 12.5%  | 13.4%  | 19.3%   
2002  | 277.8  | 11,020.3  | 95.3  | 3,778.3  | -8.9%  | 22.4%  | 16.0%  | 40.0%   
2003  | 261.4  | 10,200.5  | 83.7  | 3,266.1  | -7.8%  | 31.1%  | 18.2%  | 37.9%   
2004  | 317.4  | 12,194.1  | 112.3  | 4,312.0  | 18.3%  | 21.7%  | 15.1%  | 28.1%   
2005  | 361.2  | 13,658.0  | 143.4  | 5,421.7  | 10.3%  | 16.0%  | 12.2%  | 24.5%   
2006  | 409.1  | 15,231.4  | 178.5  | 6,646.8  | 9.9%  | 13.7%  | 10.0%  | 16.4%   
2007  | 456.9  | 16,753.8  | 232.9  | 8,538.1  | 8.8%  | 18.7%  | 8.5%  | 19.1%   
2008  | 490.3  | 17,706.2  | 306.8  | 11,079.1  | 5.3%  | 31.4%  | 7.4%  | 15.4%   
2009  | 477.6  | 16,993.0  | 268.6  | 9,557.6  | -3.2%  | 26.0%  | 7.9%  | 18.9%   
2010  | 476.1  | 16,692.6  | 318.3  | 11,158.2  | -1.5%  | 28.2%  | 8.5%  | 25.0%   
2011  | 506.3  | 17,493.7  | 352.5  | 12,180.0  | 4.2%  | 26.1%  | 8.2%  | 31.7%   
2012  | 544.8  | 18,553.4  | 352.2  | 11,993.4  | 5.6%  | 21.1%  | 7.8%  | 30.1%   
2013  | 561.8  | 18,861.6  | 259.0  | 8,695.0  | 1.3%  | 40.6%  | 7.5%  | 33.2%   
2014  | 550.0  | 18,209.2  | 203.8  | 6,747.7  | -3.9%  | 62.2%  | 6.7%  | 25.1%   
2015  | 521.0  | 17,014.2  | 323.6  | 10,568.1  | -6.2%  | 121.7%  | 7.4%  | 11.0%   
2016  | 436.5  | 14,212.9  | 279.2  | 9,092.0  | -17.0%  | 254.9%  | 20.9%  | 5.1%   
2017  | 375.1  | 12,321.9  | 143.8  | 4,725.1  | -15.7%  | 438.1%  | 27.9%  | 26.0%   
2018  | 308.7  | 10,680.6  | 98.4  | 3,404.4  | -19.6%  | 65374.1%  | 35.5%  | 180.8%   
2019  | 227.2  | 8,168.9  | 73.0  | 2,624.4  | -27.7%  | 19906.0%  | n/a  | 205.1%   
2020  | 161.2  | 5,765.5  | 43.8  | 1,566.6  | -30.0%  | 2355.1%  | n/a  | 327.7%   
2021  | 170.1  | 6,165.2  | 57.8  | 2,090.4  | 1.0%  | 1588.5%  | n/a  | 248.3%   
2022  | 196.6  | 7,301.9  | 92.1  | 3,421.8  | 8.0%  | 186.5%  | n/a  | 159.4%   
2023  | 211.9  | 7,985.1  | 92.2  | 3,474.3  | 4.0%  | 360.0%  | n/a  | n/a   
  
### Currency black market

According to DolarToday.com, the value of one US dollar in Venezuelan
bolívares fuertes on the black market through time: blue and red vertical
lines represent every time the currency has lost 90% of its value, which has
happened seven times since 2012, meaning that the currency is worth (as of
mid-February 2019) 30,000,000 times less than in August 2012, since it has
lost more than 99.99999% of its value Inflation represented by the time it
would take for money to lose 90% of its value (301-day rolling average,
inverted logarithmic scale)

The parallel exchange rate is what Venezuelans believe the Venezuelan currency
is worth compared to the US$. In the first few years of Chávez's office, his
newly created social programs required large payments in order to make the
desired changes. On 5 February 2003, the government created CADIVI, a currency
control board charged with handling foreign exchange procedures. Its creation
was to control capital flight by placing limits on individuals and only
offering them so much of a foreign currency. This limit to foreign currency
led to a creation of a currency black market economy since Venezuelan
merchants rely on foreign goods that require payments with reliable foreign
currencies. As Venezuela printed more money for their social programs, the
Bolívar continued to devalue for Venezuelan citizens and merchants since the
government held the majority of the more reliable currencies.

As of January 2018, the strongest official exchange rate was 1 US$ to 10 VEF
while the free market exchange rate was over 200,000 VEF to 1 US$. Since
merchants can only receive so much necessary foreign currency from the
government, they must resort to the black market which in turn raises the
merchant's prices on consumers. The high rates in the black market make it
difficult for businesses to purchase necessary goods since the government
often forces these businesses to make price cuts. This leads to businesses
selling their goods and making a low profit, such as Venezuelan McDonald's
franchises offering a Big Mac meal for only $1. Since businesses make low
profits, this leads to shortages since they are unable to import the goods
that Venezuela is reliant on. Venezuela's largest food producing company,
Empresas Polar, has stated that they may need to suspend some production for
nearly the entire year of 2014 since they owe foreign suppliers $463 million.
The last report of shortages in Venezuela showed that 22.4% of necessary goods
are not in stock. This was the last report by the government since the central
bank no longer posts the scarcity index. This has led to speculation that the
government is hiding its inability to control the economy which may create
doubt about future economic data released.

### Socioeconomic indicators

Like most Latin American countries, Venezuela has an unequal distribution of
wealth. Although distribution improved when the surplus of rural labor started
to diminish and the educational system improved in the middle of the 20th
century, equality is far from coinciding with western standards. The rich tend
to be very rich and the poor very poor. In 1970, the poorest fifth of the
population had 3% of national income while the wealthiest fifth had 54%. For
comparison, the United Kingdom 1973 figures were 6.3% and 38.8% and the United
States in 1972, 4.5% and 42.8%. Inequality declined during the early 2000s as
the government spent heavily on social programs to improve the well-being of
the poor. The economic crisis since 2013 has greatly increased inequality
since the heavily subsidized services that the poor rely on, such as public
hospitals and food distribution, have experienced severe shortages of
essential imported goods. Hyperinflation has destroyed the value of savings,
plunging many formerly stable, middle-class Venezuelans into extreme poverty.
Conversely, the very wealthy are more likely to have access to overseas
financial services allowing them to store their wealth in stable foreign
currencies and escape the catastrophic collapse of the Venezuelan currency.

The more recent income distribution data available is for distribution per
capita, not per household. The two are not strictly comparable because poor
households tend to have more members than rich households, thus the per
household data tends to show less inequality than the per capita data. The
table below shows the available per capita data for recent years from the
World Bank.

Personal income distribution  Year  | Share of personal income (%) received by:  | GINI index   
---|---|---  
Poorest fifth  | 2nd fifth  | 3rd fifth  | 4th fifth  | Wealthiest fifth  | Wealthiest 10%   
1987  | 4.7  | 9.2  | 14.0  | 21.5  | 50.6  | 34.2  | ~43.42   
1995  | 4.3  | 8.8  | 13.8  | 21.3  | 51.8  | 35.6  | 46.8   
1996  | 3.7  | 8.4  | 13.6  | 21.2  | 53.1  | 37.0  | 48.8   
2000  | 4.7  | 9.4  | 14.5  | 22.1  | 45.4  | 29.9  | 42.0   
2004  | 3.5  | —  | 12.9  | —  | 54.8  | —  | 45.59   
2007  | 5.1  | —  | 14.2  | —  | 47.7  | —  | 42.37   
2010  | 5.7  | —  | 14.9  | —  | 44.8  | —  | 38.98   
2011  | 5.7  | —  | 15.9  | —  | 44.8  | —  | 39.02   
2013  | —  | —  | —  | —  | —  | —  | 44.8   
2015  | —  | —  | —  | —  | —  | —  | 46.9   
Note that personal (per capita) income distribution, given in this table, is
not exactly comparable with household income distribution, given in the
previous table, because poor households tend to have more members.

Sources

    1987 data: 1991 _World Development Report_ , Table 30, pp. 262–63.
    1995 data: 1998 _World Development Report_ , Table 2.8, p. 70.
    1996 data: 2000/2001 _World Development Report_ , Table 5, pp. 282–83.
    2000 data: 2006 _World Development Indicators_ , Table 2.8.
All of the above publications are by the World Bank.

    2004 data: _Instituto Nacional de Estadística_ , p. 8
    2007 data: _Instituto Nacional de Estadística_ , p. 8
    2010 data: _Instituto Nacional de Estadística_ , p. 8
    2011 data: _Instituto Nacional de Estadística_ , p. 8
    2013 data: _United Nations Development Programme_
    2015 data: _United Nations Development Programme_  
  
Poverty in Venezuela increased during the 1980s and early 1990s, but it
decreased greatly in the mid to late 1990s. The decreasing trend continued
through the Chávez presidency, with the exception of the troubled years 2002
and 2003. Under the Bolivarian government, poverty decreased initially when
Venezuela acquired oil funds, though poverty began to increase to its highest
level in decades in the 2010s. Throughout its modern history, inequality and
poverty rates have wildly fluctuated from year to year, owing to the
government's dependence on unreliable oil revenues which send the economy into
alternating periods of rapid growth and catastrophic recession. The poverty
rate decreased from 55% to 27% in the 5-year period between 2003 and 2008,
only to then skyrocket to over 80% in the 5 years between 2012 and 2017.

The table below shows the percentage of people and the percentage of
households whose income is below a poverty line which is equal to the price of
a market basket of necessities such as food.

Percentage of people and households with income below national poverty line  Year  | 1989  | 1997  | 1998  | 1999  | 2000  | 2001  | 2002  | 2003  | 2004  | 2005  | 2006  | 2007  | 2008  | 2009  | 2010  | 2011  | 2012  | 2013  | 2014  | 2015  | 2016  | 2017   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Households  | –  | 48.1  | 43.9  | 42.0  | 40.4  | 39.0  | 48.6  | 55.1  | 47.0  | 37.9  | 30.6  | 28.5  | 27.5  | 26.7  | 26.9  | 26.5  | 21.1  | 27.3  | 48.4  | 73.0  | 81.8  | 87.0   
People  | 31.3  | 54.5  | 50.4  | 48.7  | 46.3  | 45.4  | 55.4  | 62.1  | 53.9  | 43.7  | 36.3  | 33.7  | 32.6  | 31.8  | 32.5  | 31.6  | 25.4  | 32.1  | –  | –  | –  | –   
  
Sources

    
    World Bank, 1997 _World Development Indicators_ , p. 52;
    Venezuela, Instituto Nacional de Estadística, _Pobreza por línea de ingreso, 1er semestre 1997 – 2do semestre 2013_ Archived 27 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved December 2014.
    ENCOVI – Encuesta sobre Condiciones de Vida en Venezuela Febrero 2018 Archived 1 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine
Note

    Datum is from the World Bank and as far as we know is a whole year average (1989)
    End of year data provided by Instituto Nacional de Estadística (1997–2013)
    ENCOVI used due to lack of government-provided statistics (2014–2017)  
Venezuela's extreme poverty rate from 1990 to 2013  
Source: INE  
Note: interim presidents excluded and one-year delay of data transferred during presidential term changes due to new policies, inaugurations and so on Venezuela economic indicators (2017)  indicator | %   
---|---  
Real GDP growth | −14.0%   
Inflation | 1.087.5%   
Gross national saving (% of GDP) | 12.1%   
Foreign trade  Leading markets 2013 | % of total | Leading suppliers | % of total   
---|---|---|---  
United States | 39.1 | United States | 31.7   
China | 14.3 | China | 16.8   
India | 12.0 | Brazil | 9.1   
Netherlands Antilles | 7.8 | Colombia | 4.8   
Foreign trade  Major exports | % of total | Major imports | % of total   
---|---|---|---  
Oil and gas | 90.4 | Raw materials and intermediate goods | 44.5   
Other | 9.6 | Consumer goods | 24.5   
|  | Capital goods | 31.0   
  
## Social development

In the early 2000s, when oil prices soared and offered Chávez funds not seen
since the beginning of Venezuela's economic collapse in the 1980s, Chávez's
government became "semi-authoritarian and hyper-populist" and consolidated its
power over the economy in order to gain control of large amounts of resources.
Domestically, Chávez used such oil funds for populist policies, creating the
Bolivarian missions, aimed at providing public services to improve economic,
cultural and social conditions. Despite warnings near the beginning of
Chávez's tenure in the early 2000s, Chávez's government continuously overspent
in social spending and did not save enough money for any future economic
turmoil, which Venezuela faced shortly before and after his death. On the year
of Chávez's death, Venezuela was still categorized as having high human
development on its Human Development Index in 2013 according to the United
Nations Development Programme, although human development began to decline in
Venezuela within a year, with the country dropping 10 ranks by 2014.

### Poverty and hunger

Extreme poverty and lack of food and medicines has pushed more than three
million Venezuelans to leave the country in recent years. Andres Bello
Catholic University conducted a study of poverty that found the poorest 20% of
Venezuelans had 1.4% of the nation's wealth, down from 3.4% in 2014, while the
richest 10% had 61% of the nation's wealth, up from 30%.

According to government figures released in April 2017, 1,446 children under
the age of 1 died in 2016, representing a 30 percent increase in one year. As
of August 2017, 31 million people suffered from severe food shortages. The
ENCOVI universities survey found that 73% of Venezuelans said they had lost 9
kg (20 lb) of body weight in 2016 and 64% had lost 11 kg (24 lb) in 2017.

When the country's economy collapsed in 2014, hunger and malnutrition became a
severe problem. In 2015, close to 45% of Venezuelans said they were unable to
afford food at times. In 2018, this figure rose to 79%, one of the highest
rates in the world.

Although poverty initially declined under Chávez, Venezuela's poverty rate
increased to 28% by 2013, with extreme poverty rates increasing 4.4% to 10%
according to the Venezuelan government's INE. Estimates of poverty by the
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)
and Luis Pedro España, a sociologist at the Universidad Católica Andrés Bello,
showed an increase of poverty in Venezuela. ECLAC showed a 2013 poverty rate
of 32% while Pedro España calculated a 2015 rate of 48%. The Venezuelan
government estimated that 33% were in poverty in the first half of 2015 and
then stopped producing statistics. According to Venezuelan NGO PROVEA, by the
end of 2015 there would be the same number of Venezuelans living in poverty as
there was in 2000, reversing the advancements against poverty by Chávez. The
ENCOVI annual survey by three universities estimated poverty at 48% in 2014,
82% in 2016 and 87% in 2017.

In relation to hunger, under-nutrition, undernourishment and the percentage of
children under the age of five who are moderately or severely underweight
decreased earlier in Chávez's tenure. However, shortages in Venezuela as a
result of price control policies and heavy import dependence left the majority
of Venezuelans without adequate products after his death.

### Education

The total net enrollment ratio in primary education for both sexes increased
from 87% in 1999 to 93.9% in 2009. The primary completion rate for both sexes
reached 95.1% in 2009 as compared to 80.8% in 1991. The literacy rates of 15-
to 24-year-olds in 2007, for men and women, were 98% and 98.8%, respectively.
Among the first migrants the left Venezuela during the Bolivarian Revolution,
a large percentage of the millions of Venezuelans who left the country were
highly educated, resulting in a brain drain in the country.

In 2008, Francisco Rodríguez of Wesleyan University in Connecticut and Daniel
Ortega of IESA stated that there was "little evidence" of "statistically
distinguishable effect on Venezuelan illiteracy" during the Chávez
administration. The Venezuelan government claimed that it had taught 1.5
million Venezuelans to read, but the study found that "only 1.1m were
illiterate to begin with" and that the illiteracy reduction of less than
100,000 can be attributed to adults that were elderly and died.

### Health care

Healthcare spending by percentage of Venezuela's GDP  
Source: World Bank

Following the Bolivarian Revolution and the establishment of the Bolivarian
government, initial healthcare practices were promising with the installation
of a free healthcare system parallel to the existing national public health
system, with the assistance received from Cuban medical professionals
providing aid. The Bolivarian government's failure to concentrate on
healthcare for Venezuelans, the reduction of healthcare spending and
government corruption eventually affected medical practices in Venezuela,
causing avoidable deaths along with an emigration of medical professionals to
other countries.

Venezuela's reliance on imported goods and its complicated exchange rates
initiated under Chávez led to increasing shortages during the late-2000s and
into the 2010s that affected the availability of medicines and medical
equipment in the country. The United Nations reported an increase in the
maternal mortality ratio, which increased from 93 per 100,000 in 1990 to 110
per 100,000 in 2013. Following shortages of many medical and common goods in
2014, Venezuelan women have had difficulties accessing contraceptives and were
forced to change prescriptions or search several stores and the Internet for
their medications. Shortage of antiretroviral medicines to treat HIV/AIDS
affected about 50,000 Venezuelans in 2014 as well, potentially causing
thousands of Venezuelans with HIV to develop AIDS.

Venezuela is also the only country in Latin America where the incidence of
malaria is increasing, allegedly due to illegal mining. In 2013, Venezuela
registered the highest number of cases of malaria in the past 50 years, with
300 of 100,000 Venezuelans being infected with the disease.

### Technology

In 1990, the number of Internet users in Venezuela was minimal, but 35.63% of
Venezuelans were Internet users by 2010. In fact, the number of Internet
subscribers has increased sixfold. Programs such as the National Technological
Literacy Plan, which provides free software and computers to schools, have
assisted Venezuela in meeting this goal. However, several experts state that
the poor infrastructure in Venezuela had created a poor quality of Internet in
Venezuela, which has one of the slowest Internet speeds in the world. The lack
of US$ due to the Venezuelan governments currency controls has also damaged
Internet services because technological equipment must be imported into
Venezuela.

The number of fixed telephone lines per 100 inhabitants was 7.56 in 1990. The
number increased to 24.44 in 2010. In 2000, 2,535,966 Venezuelans had landline
telephones. By 2009, this had increased to 6,866,626.

The Bolivarian government has also launched an aerospace program in
cooperation with the People's Republic of China who built and launched two
satellites that are currently in orbit—a communications satellite called Simón
Bolívar and a remote sensing satellite called Miranda. In July 2014, President
Maduro announced that a third satellite would be built by Chinese–Venezuelan
bilateral cooperation.