The **economy ofPapua New Guinea** (PNG) is largely underdeveloped with the
vast majority of the population living below the poverty line. However,
according to the Asian Development Bank its GDP is expected to grow 3.4% in
2022 and 4.6% in 2023. It is dominated by the agricultural, forestry, and
fishing sector and the minerals and energy extraction sector. The
agricultural, forestry, and fishing sector accounts for most of the labour
force of PNG while the minerals and energy extraction sector, including gold,
copper, oil and natural gas is responsible for most of the export earnings.

Main market in Goroka

PNG's GDP growth has been driven by the extraction industries and real GDP
growth per capita has averaged 4% since mid-2000. The GDP Growth rate for PNG
in 2021 was at 1.3%. The country has made significant progress investing
proceeds from oil and gas in infrastructure building. As a result, its major
cities like Port Moresby and Lae have received increased international
investor attention, giving rise to an unprecedented building boom to exploit
the opportunities presented by the country's rise as a regional economic
leader in the South Pacific region. This is well supported by its strategic
location as a gateway from the Pacific to Asia, as well as its comparatively
huge landmass and demographic profile (almost 7 times that of the rest of the
smaller Pacific Island nations)

The International Monetary Fund has reported that despite PNG's poverty, it is
richly endowed with natural resources, but exploitation has been hampered by
the rugged terrain and the high cost of developing infrastructure. Agriculture
provides a subsistence livelihood for the bulk of the population. Mineral
deposits, including oil, copper, and gold, account for 72% of export earnings.

Budgetary support from Australia and development aid under World Bank auspices
continue to sustain the economy. Australia is PNG's largest aid donor, and
will provide $479.2 million of aid in 2023. In June 2021 the World Bank
approved a US$100 million (PGK 352 million equivalent) operation to support
Papua New Guinea in its response to COVID-19, and to lay important foundations
for a sustainable recovery.

## Economy

Port Moresby's central business district

Papua New Guinea is classified as a developing economy by the International
Monetary Fund. The economy is largely dependent on natural resources. As of
2018, natural resource extraction made up 28% of overall GDP, with substantial
contributors including minerals, oil, and natural gas.

According to the Investment Promotion Authority of Papua New Guinea the major
economic sectors are agriculture and livestock, forestry, mining and
petroleum, tourism and hospitality, fisheries and marine resources,
manufacturing, retailing and wholesaling, building and construction, transport
and telecommunications, and finance and business trade. The economy generally
can be separated into subsistence and market sectors, although the distinction
is blurred by smallholder cash cropping of coffee, cocoa, and copra. About 75%
of the country's population relies primarily on the subsistence economy. The
minerals, timber, and fish sectors are dominated by foreign investors.
Manufacturing is limited, and the formal labour sector consequently also is
limited.

Timber and marine resources are also exported, with the country being one of
the few suppliers of tropical timber, Forestry is an important economic
resource for Papua New Guinea, but the industry uses low and semi-intensive
technological inputs. As a result, product ranges are limited to sawed timber,
veneer, plywood, block board, moulding, poles and posts and wood chips. Only a
few limited finished products are exported. Lack of automated machinery,
coupled with inadequately trained local technical personnel, are some of the
obstacles to introducing automated machinery and design. Forestry is an avenue
for corruption and many projects face legal uncertainty. Up to 70% of logging
may be illegal. Marine fisheries provide around 10% of global catch.

Other sources include renewable resources, such as forests, marine resources
(including a large portion of the world's major tuna stocks), and in some
parts agriculture. Agriculture, for subsistence and cash crops, provides a
livelihood for 85% of the population and continues to provide some 30% of GDP.
Oil palm production has grown steadily over recent years (largely from estates
and with extensive outgrower output), with palm oil now the main agricultural
export. Coffee remains the major export crop (produced largely in the
Highlands provinces); followed by cocoa and coconut oil/copra from the coastal
areas, each largely produced by smallholders; tea, produced on estates; and
rubber.[_citation needed_]

Measuring economic growth is tricky due to the resource-dependent economy
distorting GDP. Other metrics such as Gross national income are hard to
measure. Even historical GDP estimates have changed dramatically. As of 2019,
PNG's real GDP growth rate was 3.8%, with an inflation rate of 4.3% This
economic growth has been primarily attributed to strong commodity prices,
particularly mineral but also agricultural, with the high demand for mineral
products largely sustained even during the crisis by the buoyant Asian
markets, a booming mining sector and by a buoyant outlook and the construction
phase for natural gas exploration, production, and exportation in liquefied
form (liquefied natural gas or "LNG") by LNG tankers, all of which will
require multibillion-dollar investments (exploration, production wells,
pipelines, storage, liquefaction plants, port terminals, LNG tanker ships).

Formal employment is low. There is a minimum wage, but it has declined in real
terms since independence. In the late 2010s, around 40% of those employed in
urban areas worked outside of agriculture, but only around 20% in rural areas.

The Papua New Guinean kina is managed through a crawling peg, with its value
heavily impacted by the country's natural resource exports. The largest
bilateral trade partner is Australia, followed by Japan, and then China.

## Mineral resources

The Ok Tedi Mine in southwestern Papua New Guinea

Significant exported minerals include gold, copper, cobalt, and nickel. Oil
and liquified natural gas (LNG) are also significant resource exports.
Extractive resources make up 86% of all exports, has their high value has
enabled the country to generally run current account surpluses. The biggest
mine is a private gold mine on Lihir Island, which is followed by the state-
run Ok Tedi Mine, and then the Porgera Gold Mine. LNG exports began in 2014,
although the opening of new projects has been delayed due to disputes
regarding revenue sharing.

In 1999, mineral production accounted for 26.3% of gross domestic product.
Government revenues and foreign exchange earning minerals. Copper and gold
mines are currently in production at Porgera, Ok Tedi, Misima, Lihir, Simberi
and Hidden Valley. As of 2014, talks of resuming mining operations in the
Panguna mine have also resurfaced, with the Autonomous Bougainville Government
and National Government of Papua New Guinea expressing interest in restarting
mining operations in the area.

New nickel, copper and gold projects have been identified and are awaiting a
rise in commodity prices to begin development. At early 2011, there are
confirmation that Mount Suckling project has found at least two new large
highly prospective porphyry bodies at Araboro Creek and Ioleu Creek. A
consortium led by Chevron is producing and exporting oil from the Southern
Highlands Province of Papua New Guinea. In 2001, it expects to begin the
commercialization of the country's estimated 640 km3 (23 trillion cubic feet)
of natural gas reserves through the construction of a gas pipeline from Papua
New Guinea to Queensland, Australia. The project was shelved.

In 2019, the country was the 8th largest world producer of cobalt, and the
15th largest world producer of gold. In the production of silver, in 2017 the
country produced 90 tons.

Mineral deposits account for 72% of export earnings.

The Iagifu/Hedinia Field was discovered in 1986 in the Papuan fold and thrust
belt.

The first major gas project was the PNG LNG joint venture. ExxonMobil is
operator of the joint venture, also comprising PNG company Oil Search, Santos,
Kumul Petroleum Holdings (Papua New Guinea's national oil and gas company), JX
Nippon Oil and Gas Exploration, the PNG government's Mineral Resources
Development Company and Petromin PNG Holdings. The project is an integrated
development that includes gas production and processing facilities in the
Hela, Southern Highlands and Western Provinces of Papua New Guinea, including
liquefaction and storage facilities (located northwest of Port Moresby) with
capacity of 6.9 million tonnes per year. There are over 700 kilometres (430
mi) of pipelines connecting the facilities.[_non-primary source needed_] It is
the largest private-sector investment in the history of PNG. A second major
project is based on initial rights held by the French oil and gas major
TotalEnergies and the U.S. company InterOil Corp. (IOC), which have partly
combined their assets after TotalEnergies agreed in December 2013 to purchase
61.3% of IOC's Antelope and Elk gas field rights, with the plan to develop
them starting in 2016, including the construction of a liquefaction plant to
allow export of LNG. TotalEnergies has separately another joint operating
agreement with Oil Search.

Further gas and mineral projects are proposed (including the large Wafi-Golpu
copper-gold mine), with extensive exploration ongoing across the
country.[_failed verification_]

### Gold discovery

Traces of gold were first found in 1852, in pottery from Redscar Bay on the
Papuan Peninsula.

## Agriculture, timber, and fish

Agriculture in the country includes crops grown for domestic sale and
international export, as well as for subsistence agriculture. Agricultural
export of commodities such as copra, copra oil, rubber, tea, cocoa, and coffee
have not grown. However, the conversion of forests to oil palm plantations to
produce palm oil has become a significant and growing source of employment and
income. Overall the country produces 1.6% of global palm oil, and 1% of global
coffee. While not the largest sector of the economy, agriculture provides the
most employment, at around 85% of all jobs.

Nearly 40% of the population are subsistence farmers, living relatively
independently of the cash economy. Their traditional social groupings are
explicitly acknowledged by the Papua New Guinea Constitution, which expresses
the wish for "traditional villages and communities to remain as viable units
of Papua New Guinean society" and protects their continuing importance to
local and national community life.[_citation needed_] This makes farming the
most widespread economic activity. Most is carried out through simple rainfed
surface irrigation, with specific techniques varying by location. Taro is a
historical crop, although the introduction of the now-staple sweet potato
allowed for cultivation as high as 2,700 metres (8,900 ft). _Metroxylon_ (a
sago palm) is another common crop.

The agricultural, forestry, and fishing sector accounts for most of the labour
force of PNG. Agriculture currently accounts for 25% of GDP and supports more
than 80% of the population. Most agriculture is subsistence, while cash crops
are exported. The main crops by value are coffee, oil, cocoa, copra, tea,
rubber, and sugar. The timber industry was not active in 1998, due to low
world prices, but rebounded in 1999. About 40% of the country is covered with
timber rich trees, and a domestic woodworking industry has been slow to
develop. Fish exports are confined primarily to shrimp, although fishing boats
of other nations catch tuna in Papua New Guinea waters under license.

Papua New Guinea has the largest yam market in Asia.

Papua New Guinea produced in 2021:

  * 3.0 million tons of palm oil (7th largest world producer);
  * 1.8 million tons of coconut (7th largest world producer);
  * 1.3 million tons of banana;
  * 1.1 million tons of fruits, fresh nes;
  * 699 thousand tons of sweet potato (17th largest world producer);
  * 371 thousand tons of yam;
  * 361 thousand tons of root and tubers;
  * 353 thousand tons of sugar cane;
  * 322 thousand tons of vegetable;
  * 278 thousand tons of taro;
  * 247 thousand tons of maize (green);
  * 156 thousand tons of cassava;
  * 109 thousand tons of berries nes;
  * 42 thousand tons of coffee;
  * 42 thousand tons of cocoa;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like
natural rubber (7.7 thousand tons) and tea (5.5 thousand tons).

## Industry

In general, the Papua New Guinea economy is highly dependent on imports for
manufactured goods. Its industrial sector—exclusive of mining—accounts for
only 9% of GDP and contributes little to exports. Small-scale industries
produce beer, soap, concrete products, clothing, paper products, matches, ice
cream, canned meat, fruit juices, furniture, plywood, and paint. The small
domestic market, relatively high wages, and high transport costs are
constraints to industrial development.

## Telecommunications

Until the second half of 2007, information and communication technology (ICT)
services in Papua New Guinea (PNG) were limited to urban centres under the
monopoly operator, Telikom PNG (Mitchel 2008). Thereafter, the Irish owned
utility Digicel entered the mobile market and expanded mobile signal coverage
across the country enabling connectivity to many people — the mobile phone
penetration rate reached 41 per cent by 2014, marking a substantial change in
the communications landscape. PNG has 42.68 mobile phone users per 100
population, estimated in 2017. PNG has a low level of broadband uptake,
estimated in 2017 at 0.213 per 100 population.

## Energy

Particularly in rural areas there is reliance on traditional sources of
biomass energy for cooking.

### Electricity

#### Access to electricity

By 2017, only 50.42% of the rural population had access to electricity. 80.23%
of the urban population in 2017 had access to electricity. Limitations in the
transmission and distribution infrastructure lead to frequent outages in urban
centers.

#### Consumption

Electricity - consumption: 3.116 billion kWh (2012 est.)

#### Generation

Electricity - production: 3.35 billion kWh (2012 est.)

#### Transmission and distribution

PNG Power Ltd (PPL) operates three separate grids. There are two main large
grids, the Port Moresby system serving the National Capital District and the
large Ramu grid that extends into the highlands. Also, PPL operates the small
Gazelle Peninsula Grid powered mainly by a 10 MW run-of-river hydro plant.

#### Entities and institutions

The Electricity Commission (ELCOM) was privatised with the passage of the
Electricity Commission (Privatization) Act 2002. PNG Power Limited (PPL) is a
vertically integrated utility responsible for generation, transmission,
distribution and retailing of electricity throughout Papua New Guinea.

#### Electricity generation by source

#### Renewable energy

A study by Bloomberg New Energy Finance ranked PNG in the top 10 for potential
renewable resources, with about 2.5 GW of these but only 2% of it exploited.

##### Hydroelectric projects

The Yonki Dam project, which commenced operation in 1991, on the Ramu River
has generation capacity of 77 MW (103,000 hp) (Ramu 1) plus proposed
additional capacity of 18 MW.

###### Proposed projects

The list of intended projects include the US$2 billion Ramu 2 hydro project on
the Ramu River to be built under a public-private partnership with Shenzhen
Energy Group.

Edevu Dam is to be constructed by PNG Hydro Development Ltd (PNGHDL) to
generate 50 Megawatts (MW).

Consultants to PNG Power have conducted feasibility studies for the Naoro
Brown hydroelectricity Project which would supply up to 80MW of electricity to
the Port Moresby grid.

## Transport

The country's mountainous terrain impedes transport. Aeroplanes opened up the
country during its colonial period and continue to be used for most travel and
most high-density/value freight. The capital, Port Moresby, has no road links
to any of PNG's other major towns. Similarly, many remote villages are
reachable only by light aircraft or on foot.

Jacksons International Airport is the major international airport in Papua New
Guinea, located 8 kilometres (5 mi) from Port Moresby. In addition to two
international airfields,[_citation needed_] Papua New Guinea has over 500
airstrips, most of which are unpaved. The national airline is Air Niugini,
operating out of Jacksons International.[_non-primary source needed_]

Transport in Papua New Guinea is in many cases heavily limited by the
mountainous terrain. The capital, Port Moresby, is not linked by road to any
of the other major towns and many highland villages can only be reached by
light aircraft or on foot.

Papua New Guinea has no major railways, but some mine sites have disused
tracks.

The country has 10,940 km (6,800 mi) of waterways, and commercial port
facilities at Port Moresby, Alotau, Oro Bay, Lae, Kimbe, Kieta Madang, Buka,
Rabaul/Kokopo, Kiunga, Wewak and Vanimo.

## Finance

The Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG) is the central bank of Papua New Guinea.
Its main function is to issue currency and to act as the banker and financial
agent to the Government. It is also in charge of regulating banking and other
financial services and manages the gold, foreign exchange and any other
international reserves of Papua New Guinea.

BPNG is engaged in developing policies to promote financial inclusion and is a
member of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, which had been formed in 2008.
In 2013, BPNG made a Maya Declaration Commitment to create an enabling
environment for building an inclusive financial sector in Papua New Guinea.

The currency of Papua New Guinean, issued by the BPNG, is the kina, which was
introduced on 19 April 1975 to replace the Australian dollar.

## Trade and investment

In 2014, Papua New Guinea's merchandise exports were:

  * 41% fuels and mining;
  * 23.8% agriculture;
  * 6.2% manufacturing; and
  * 29% other.

Major destinations for merchandise exports include Australia (39.9%), the
European Union (20.2%), Japan (11.7%), China (6.7%), and Singapore (5.6%).

In 2014, Papua New Guinea's merchandise imports were:

  * 17.8% fuels and mining;
  * 11.4% agriculture;
  * 69.4% manufacturing; and
  * 1.4% other.

Major source countries for merchandise imports include Australia (34.4%),
Singapore (14.3%), the European Union (8.3%), China (6.9%), and Japan (6.4%).

Petroleum, mining machinery and aircraft have been the primary U.S. exports to
Papua New Guinea. In 1999, as mineral exploration and new minerals investments
declined, as did United States exports. Crude oil is the largest U.S. import
from Papua New Guinea, followed by gold, cocoa, coffee, and copper ore.

U.S. companies are active in developing Papua New Guinea's mining and
petroleum sectors. Chevron operates the Kutubu and Gobe oil projects and is
developing its natural gas reserves. A 5,000–6,000 m³ (30,000–40,000 barrel)
per day oil refinery project in which there is an American interest also is
under development in Port Moresby.

In 1993, Papua New Guinea became a participating economy in the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC) Forum. In 1996, it joined the World Trade
Organization (WTO).

## Development programs and aid

Papua New Guinea is highly dependent on foreign aid. Australia has been the
largest bilateral aid donor to PNG, providing $A506 million ($US376 million)
in 2016. Budgetary support, which has been provided in decreasing amounts
since independence, was phased out in 2000, with aid concentrated on project
development.

Other major aid sources to Papua New Guinea are Japan, the European Union, the
People's Republic of China, the Republic of China, the United Nations, the
Asian Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank.
Volunteers from a number of countries, including the United States, and
mission church workers also provide education, health, and development
assistance throughout the country.

In July 2024 The International Monetary Fund would provide Papua New Guinea
with immediate access to about $125 million in order "to support Papua New
Guinea’s reform agenda, help protect the vulnerable and foster inclusive
growth, with a focus maintained on strengthening debt sustainability,
alleviating FX shortages, and enhancing governance and anti-corruption
frameworks,"

## Land tenure

The Ok Tedi Mine in southwestern Papua New Guinea

Over 97% of the country designated as customary land, held by communities.
Many such effective titles remain unregistered and effectively informal. Land
registration efforts have had very limited success.

The PNG legislature has enacted laws in which a type of tenure called
"customary land title" is recognised, meaning that the traditional lands of
the indigenous peoples have some legal basis for inalienable tenure. This
customary land notionally covers most of the usable land in the country (some
97% of total land area); alienated land is either held privately under state
lease or is government land. Freehold title (also known as fee simple) can
only be held by Papua New Guinean citizens.

Only some 3% of the land of Papua New Guinea is in private hands; this is
privately held under a 99-year state lease, or it is held by the State. There
is virtually no freehold title; the few existing freeholds are automatically
converted to state leases when they are transferred between vendor and
purchaser. Unalienated land is owned under customary title by traditional
landowners. The precise nature of the seisin varies from one culture to
another. Many writers portray land as the communal ownership of traditional
clans; however, closer studies usually show that the smallest portions of land
whose ownership cannot be further divided are held by the individual heads of
extended families and their descendants or their descendants alone if they
have recently died.[_citation needed_]

This is a matter of vital importance because a problem of economic development
is identifying the membership of customary landowning groups and the owners.
Disputes between mining and forestry companies and landowner groups often
devolve on the issue of whether the companies entered into contractual
relations for the use of land with the true owners. Customary property—usually
land—cannot be devised by will. It can only be inherited according to the
custom of the deceased's people.[_citation needed_] The Lands Act was amended
in 2010 along with the Land Group Incorporation Act, intended to improve the
management of state land, mechanisms for dispute resolution over land, and to
enable customary landowners to be better able to access finance and possible
partnerships over portions of their land if they seek to develop it for urban
or rural economic activities. The Land Group Incorporation Act requires more
specific identification of the customary landowners than hitherto and their
more specific authorisation before any land arrangements are determined; (a
major issue in recent years has been a land grab, using, or rather misusing,
the Lease-Leaseback provision under the Land Act, notably using 'Special
Agricultural and Business Leases' (SABLs) to acquire vast tracts of customary
land, purportedly for agricultural projects, but in almost all cases as a
back-door mechanism for securing tropical forest resources for
logging—circumventing the more exacting requirements of the Forest Act, for
securing Timber Permits (which must comply with sustainability requirements
and be competitively secured, and with the customary landowners' approval).
Following a national outcry, these SABLs have been subject to a Commission of
Inquiry, established in mid-2011, for which the report is still awaited for
initial presentation to the Prime Minister and Parliament.[_as of?_][_citation
needed_]

## Science and technology

Papua New Guinea's _National Vision 2050_ was adopted in 2009. This has led to
the establishment of the Research, Science and Technology Council. At its
gathering in November 2014, the Council re-emphasised the need to focus on
sustainable development through science and technology.

_Vision 2050'_ s medium-term priorities are:

  * emerging industrial technology for downstream processing;
  * infrastructure technology for the economic corridors;
  * knowledge-based technology;
  * science and engineering education; and
  * to reach the target of investing 5% of GDP in research and development by 2050. (Papua New Guinea invested 0.03% of GDP in research and development in 2016.)

In 2016, women accounted for 33.2% of researchers in Papua New Guinea.

According to Thomson Reuters' Web of Science, Papua New Guinea had the largest
number of publications (110) among Pacific Island states in 2014, followed by
Fiji (106). Nine out of ten scientific publications from Papua New Guinea
focused on immunology, genetics, biotechnology and microbiology. Nine out of
ten were also co-authored by scientists from other countries, mainly
Australia, the United States of America, the United Kingdom, Spain and
Switzerland. In 2019 Papua New Guinea produced 253 publications in the Scopus
(Elsevier) database of scientific publications. Health sciences accounted for
49% of these publications. Papua New Guinea's top scientific collaborators
from 2017 to 2019 were Australia, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, France and India.

Renewable energy sources represent two-thirds of the total electricity supply.
In 2015, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community observed that, 'while Fiji,
Papua New Guinea, and Samoa are leading the way with large-scale hydropower
projects, there is enormous potential to expand the deployment of other
renewable energy options such as solar, wind, geothermal and ocean-based
energy sources'. The European Union funded the Renewable Energy in Pacific
Island Countries Developing Skills and Capacity programme (EPIC) over 2013 to
2017. The programme developed a master's programme in renewable energy
management, accredited in 2016, at the University of Papua New Guinea and
helped to establish a Centre of Renewable Energy at the same university.

Papua New Guinea is one of the 15 beneficiaries of a programme on Adapting to
Climate Change and Sustainable Energy worth €37.26 million. The programme
resulted from the signing of an agreement in February 2014 between the
European Union and the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat. The other
beneficiaries are the Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands,
Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

## Economic conditions

By mid-1999, Papua New Guinea's economy was in crisis. Although its
agricultural sector had recovered from the 1997 drought and timber prices were
rising as most Asian economies recovered from their 1998 slump, Papua New
Guinea's foreign currency earnings suffered from low world mineral and
petroleum prices. Estimates of minerals in exploration expenditure in 1999
were one-third of what was spent in 1997. The resulting lower foreign exchange
earnings, capital flight, and general government mismanagement resulted in a
precipitous drop in the value of Papua New Guinea's currency, the kina,
leading to a dangerous decrease in foreign currency reserves. The kina has
floated since 1994. Economic activity decreased in most sectors; imports of
all kinds shrunk; and inflation, which had been over 21% in 1998, slowed to an
estimated annual rate of 8% in 1999.

Citing the previous government's failure to successfully negotiate acceptable
commercial loans or bond sales to cover its budget deficit, the government
formed by Sir Mekere Morauta in July 1999 successfully requested emergency
assistance from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. With
assistance from the Fund and the Bank, the government has made considerable
progress toward macroeconomic stabilization and economic reform.

As of 2019, although statistics show that an economic recovery is underway,
Papua New Guinea's economy is still struggling.

The rugged terrain (including high mountain ranges and valleys, swamps and
islands) and the high cost of developing infrastructure, combined with other
factors (including law and order problems in some centres and the system of
customary land title) make it difficult for outside developers. Local
developers are hindered by years of deficient investment in education, health,
and access to finance.

The country's terrain has made it difficult for the country to develop
transportation infrastructure, resulting in air travel being the most
efficient and reliable means of transportation. There are five highways,
although only two go into the interior. Domestic shipping is limited. Overall
housing quality is low, with 15% of houses having a finished floor in the late
2010s. In urban areas, 55% of houses were connected to electricity in 2016.
Rural areas saw only 10% connection, although this is a significant increase
from 3% in 1996. Over half of urban houses had access to piped water, while
only 15% of rural houses did, although rural houses had more access to wells.
The average number of people per room was 2.5.

The Sirinumu Dam and Yonki Dam provide some hydropower. There is limited
sewage treatment, even in the capital. Some is discharged directly into the
ocean, leading to issues with pollution.

Former Prime Minister Sir Mekere Morauta tried to restore integrity to state
institutions, stabilise the kina, restore stability to the national budget,
privatise public enterprises where appropriate, and ensure ongoing peace on
Bougainville following the 1997 agreement which ended Bougainville's
secessionist unrest. The Morauta government had considerable success in
attracting international support, specifically gaining the backing of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank in securing development
assistance loans.

The PNG government's long-term Vision 2050 and shorter-term policy documents,
including the 2013 Budget and the 2014 Responsible Sustainable Development
Strategy, emphasise the need for a more diverse economy, based upon
sustainable industries and avoiding the effects of Dutch disease from major
resource extraction projects undermining other industries. This occurred in
many countries experiencing oil or other mineral booms, notably in Western
Africa, undermining much of their agriculture sector, manufacturing and
tourism, and with them broad-based employment prospects. Measures have been
taken to mitigate these effects, including through the establishment of a
sovereign wealth fund, partly to stabilise revenue and expenditure flows, but
much will depend upon the readiness to make real reforms to effective use of
revenue, tackling rampant corruption and empowering households and businesses
to access markets, services and develop a more buoyant economy, with lower
costs, especially for small to medium-sized enterprises.[_citation needed_]
Economic 'development' based on the extractive industries also carries
difficult consequences for local communities. One major project conducted
through the PNG Department for Community Development suggested that other
pathways to sustainable development should be considered.

The Institute of National Affairs, a PNG independent policy think tank,
provides a report on the business and investment environment of Papua New
Guinea every five years, based upon a survey of large and small, local and
overseas companies, highlighting law and order problems and corruption, as the
worst impediments, followed by the poor state of transport, power and
communications infrastructure.[_non-primary source needed_]

### Main indicators

Main economic indicators 1980–2016 [_needs update_] Year  | GDP  | GDP  
growth  
(real) | Inflation  | Government  
debt  
(% of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---  
Total  
(bil. US$ PPP) | Per capita  
(US$ PPP) | Total  
(bil. US$ nominal)  
1980  | 10.1  | 1,067  | 4.1  | −2.3%  | 12.1%  | ...   
1985  | 11.9  | 1,323  | 3.3  | 3.6%  | 3.7%  | ...   
1990  | 15.4  | 1,462  | 4.8  | −3.0%  | 7.0%  | ...   
1995  | 23.4  | 2,067  | 7.1  | −3.4%  | 17.3%  | 36%   
2000  | 29.6  | 2,056  | 5.2  | −2.5%  | 15.6%  | 42%   
2005  | 13.2  | 2,280  | 7.3  | 3.9%  | 1.8%  | 32%   
2006  | 13.9  | 2,348  | 8.4  | 2.3%  | 2.4%  | 26%   
2007  | 15.9  | 2,348  | 9.5  | 11.1%  | 0.9%  | 23%   
2008  | 16.1  | 2,617  | 11.7  | −0.3%  | 10.8%  | 22%   
2009  | 17.3  | 2,600  | 11.6  | 6.8%  | 6.9%  | 22%   
2010  | 19.3  | 2,891  | 14.3  | 10.1%  | 5.1%  | 17%   
2011  | 20.0  | 2,830  | 18.0  | 1.1%  | 4.4%  | 16%   
2012  | 21.3  | 2,861  | 21.3  | 4.6%  | 4.5%  | 19%   
2013  | 22.4  | 2,954  | 21.3  | 3.8%  | 5.0%  | 25%   
2014  | 25.7  | 3,313  | 23.2  | 12.5%  | 5.2%  | 27%   
2015  | 28.0  | 3,540  | 21.7  | 9.0%  | 6.0%  | 29%   
2016  | 29.1  | 3,597  | 20.8  | 2.4%  | 6.7%  | 32%   
  
## Statistics

**Household income or consumption by percentage share:**  
_lowest 10%:_ 4.3%  
_highest 10%:_ 36% (2008)

**Labour force:** 2.078 million

**Electricity – production:** 2,200 GWh (2008)

**Electricity – production by source:**  
_fossil fuel:_ 67.78%  
_hydro:_ 32.22%  
_nuclear:_ 0%  
_other:_ 0% (2008)

**Electricity – consumption:** 2,000 GWh (2008)

**Electricity exports:** 10 kWh (2008)

**Electricity – imports:** 0 kWh (2008)

**Agriculture – products:** coffee, cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, tea,
rubber, sweet potatoes, fruit, vegetables; poultry, pork, vanilla

**Currency:** 1 kina (K) = 100 toea

**Exchange rates:** kina (K) per US$1 – 3.14 (April 2016), 2.7624 (November
1999), 2.520 (1999), 2.058 (1998), 1.434 (1997), 1.318 (1996), 1.276 (1995)