The **economy of Palestine** refers to the economic activity of Palestine.
Palestine receives substantial financial aid from various international
donors, including governments and international organizations. In 2020, the
inflation rate was -0.7% and the unemployment rate was 25.9%. While exports
were recorded at US$1 billion, with an import value of US$6 billion.
Contributors to the national economy is service sector (47%), wholesale and
repair (19%), manufacturing (12%), agriculture (7%), finance and banking (3%),
construction (5%), information technology (5%) and transportation sector (2%).

This aid is crucial for supporting the Palestinian Authority and funding
public services and development projects. Palestinians working abroad send
money back to their families in Palestine. These remittances provide a
significant source of income for many households. Palestinian economy relies
heavily on donations and international aid from various sources, including
UNRWA, Qatar, Turkey, the European Union, and non-governmental organizations.
Contribution to the economy also comes from remittances sent by the
Palestinian diaspora. Gazans experience additional difficulties as they are
subjected to a siege, with Israel controlling the movement of people and goods
in and out of Gaza. Nonetheless, there are limited business opportunities
available in Gaza. Contrastingly, the West Bank provides Palestinians with
more diverse opportunities. Some individuals own businesses in tourism-driven
areas such as Bethlehem and Jerusalem, as tourism serves as a significant
source of income. Others engage in various types of enterprises in cities like
Ramallah and Hebron, ranging from trading to construction and IT services.
Furthermore, approximately 100,000 Palestinians find employment in Israeli
companies as low-cost labor, earning significantly less than the average
Israeli worker.

While trade is restricted due to political factors, Palestine does engage in
some export activities. Palestinian products, such as agricultural goods and
traditional crafts, are exported to regional and international markets.
Despite the challenges, tourism plays a role in the Palestinian economy. The
historical and cultural significance of places like Bethlehem and Jerusalem
draws tourists. Agriculture remains a crucial sector, with Palestinians
cultivating crops, producing olive oil, and raising livestock. Some
Palestinians work in various service industries, including education,
healthcare, and technology. Palestine hosts numerous international non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and humanitarian agencies, which contribute
to the local economy and provide employment.

## History

GDP per capita in the Palestinian territories rose by 7% per year from 1968 to
1980 but slowed during the 1980s. Between 1970 and 1991 life expectancy rose
from 56 to 66 years, infant mortality per 1,000 fell from 95 to 42, households
with electricity rose from 30% to 85%, households with safe water rose from
15% to 90%, households with a refrigerator rose from 11% to 85%, and
households with a washing machine rose from 23% in 1980 to 61% in 1991.

Economic conditions in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, where economic activity
was governed by the Paris Economic Protocol of April 1994 between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, deteriorated in the early 1990s. Real per capita
GDP for the West Bank and Gaza Strip (WBGS) declined 36.1% between 1992 and
1996 owing to the combined effect of falling aggregate incomes and robust
population growth. The downturn in economic activity was due to Israeli
closure policies in response to terrorist attacks in Israel, which disrupted
previously established labor and commodity market relationships. The most
serious effect was the emergence of chronic unemployment. Average unemployment
rates in the 1980s were generally under 5%; while by the mid-1990s it had
risen to over 20%. After 1997, Israel's use of comprehensive closures
decreased and new policies were implemented. In October 1999, Israel permitted
the opening of a safe passage between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in
accordance with the 1995 Interim Agreement. These changes in the conduct of
economic activity fueled a moderate economic recovery in 1998–99.

As a result of the Israeli blockade, 85% of factories were shut or operated at
less than 20% capacity. It is estimated that Israeli businesses lost $2
million a day from the closure while Gaza lost approximately $1 million a day.
The World Bank estimated the nominal GDP of the territories at US$4,007,000
and of Israel at US$161,822,000. Per capita these numbers are respectively
US$1,036 and US$22,563 per year.

### Prosperity

During the worldwide recession of the 1930s, Palestine, including its Arab
population, suffered severe economic hardships. The global economic downturn
had an impact on the region, leading to economic decline and increased
unemployment. However, by the end of World War II, Palestine had experienced a
significant level of prosperity and was considered one of the most advanced
countries in the Middle East in terms of economic development. This prosperity
was attributed to several factors. Firstly, during the war, Palestine served
as a center of British communications, which brought numerous benefits to the
economy. The region benefited from contracts in transport, military
construction, and supply, as well as the establishment of a large oil refinery
in Haifa. These activities created employment opportunities and stimulated
economic growth. Additionally, agricultural exports, particularly citrus
fruit, saw a marked increase during this period. The disruption of supplies
from other parts of the Mediterranean due to the war, especially the actions
of the Germans, created a higher demand for Palestinian citrus products. This
presented an opportunity for both Arab and Jewish citrus producers to take
advantage of the increased demand and contribute to the economic growth.
Although many contracts awarded by the British Mandatory authorities during
this period went to the new Jewish immigrants, Arab Palestinians also
benefited from the economic opportunities. Arab Palestinians were able to
provide cheaper labor, which made them attractive for employment in various
sectors. They found employment in the railroads, large military construction
projects, and government departments like the police.

During the war, Palestine experienced a period of economic prosperity, which
coincided with new forms of investment and trade that connected the region and
its entrepreneurs to the global market. The profits generated during this time
were invested in various financial instruments such as shares, government
bonds, and commodity stocks. After the dispersion of people in 1948, some
individuals were able to recover a portion of their wealth through these
investments. The passage suggests that data collected by the Mandatory
government provides estimates of the wealth held in Palestine during that
period. According to the data, the total ownership of capital in the country
in 1945 amounted to 281 million Palestinian pounds. Of this total,
approximately 47 percent (132.6 million pounds) was owned by the Arab
community. The majority of this wealth (74.8 million pounds) was invested in
rural landholdings that could not be transferred abroad. However, there were
other assets, such as investments in foreign stocks and shares, which were in
a form that could be recovered by those who went into exile. These foreign
liquid assets amounted to just over 39 million pounds. Additionally, Arab
banks in Palestine held 7 million pounds in bank deposits, and another 3
million pounds were deposited in the Ottoman Bank or the local branch of
Barclays Bank, some of which was recovered through international litigation in
the early 1950s.

A significant portion of the bank deposits held in Arab banks in Palestine,
amounting to approximately 10 million pounds, was transferred to Jordan. This
transfer occurred as a result of the mass displacement of Palestinians during
the 1948-1949 Arab-Israeli war, with many seeking refuge in Jordan.
Furthermore, it mentions that at least 1.5 million pounds in the form of
banknotes was brought into the country prior to the abolition of the
Palestinian currency. This indicates that individuals who left Palestine took
physical banknotes with them as they sought refuge or migrated to other
regions. At least 1.5 million pounds in the form of banknotes was transferred
to Syria. Smaller amounts being sent to Egypt and Iraq. These transfers
suggest that some individuals who left Palestine took physical banknotes with
them to these countries.

### Economic rise (1970—2000)

During the 1970s and subsequent years, a considerable number of Palestinians
sought employment opportunities in Israel. This labor integration provided
income and remittances, which had positive effects on the Palestinian economy.
Palestinian workers played a significant role in various sectors of the
Israeli economy, such as construction, agriculture, and manufacturing. While
there were some economic benefits from labor integration, the overall economic
disparities between Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories persisted.
Palestinians faced limited access to resources, markets, and capital, which
hindered their economic development.

Integration into the Israeli labor market provided Palestinians with access to
job opportunities that were not readily available in the occupied territories.
Palestinians found employment in various sectors, including construction,
agriculture, manufacturing, and services. This helped alleviate unemployment
and provided a source of income for Palestinian workers and their families.
The General Federation of Trade Unions, representing Palestinian workers, was
founded to advocate for their rights and interests.

Palestinian exports peaked in 1981 followed by a decline through the 1990s. In
the same time period imports nearly doubled, increasing a trade deficit of 35%
of GDP in 1981 to a deficit of 45% of GDP in 1996. The first Intifada, a
Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation, which took place from 1987 to
1993, had a profound impact on the Palestinian economy. The Intifada led to
widespread disruptions, closures, and restrictions imposed by Israel, which
greatly affected economic activities and livelihoods. In 1991, the invasion of
Kuwait and resulting Gulf War affected the Palestinian economy. The Madrid
Conference, held that same year, improved economic collaboration between the
Arab countries and Israel.

The Oslo Accords, signed in the 1990s, led to the establishment of the
Palestinian Authority (PA) and limited self-governance in parts of the West
Bank and Gaza. The PA took on responsibilities in areas such as trade,
investment, and public services. However, the overall impact on the
Palestinian economy was mixed, as the peace process faced setbacks and the
Israeli occupation persisted. In 1994, The Paris Protocol was signed,
outlining economic relations between Israel and the PA, including provisions
for labor movement and employment. Next year, the Israeli government imposed
restrictions on the movement of Palestinian workers within Israel due to
security concerns. The PA assumed control over some economic sectors,
including tourism, trade, and investment by 1995. Until 1999 the Palestinian
economy experienced a period of relative growth and stability with increased
international aid and improved economic indicators.

For 30 years, Israel permitted thousands of Palestinians to enter the country
each day to work in construction, agriculture and other blue-collar jobs.
During this period, the Palestinian economy was significantly greater than the
majority of Arab states. Until the mid-1990s, up to 150,000 people—about a
fifth of the Palestinian labor force—entered Israel each day. After
Palestinians unleashed a wave of suicide bombings, the idea of separation from
the Palestinians took root in Israel. Israel found itself starved for labor,
and gradually replaced most of the Palestinians with migrants from Thailand,
Romania and elsewhere.

### Intifada and recovery (2000–present)

In 2005, the PNA Ministry of Finance cited the Israeli West Bank barrier,
whose construction began in the second half of 2002, as one reason for the
depressed Palestinian economic activity. Real GDP growth in the West Bank
declined substantially in 2000, 2001, and 2002, and increased modestly in 2003
and 2004. The World Bank attributed the modest economic growth since 2003 to
"diminished levels of violence, fewer curfews, and more predictable (albeit
still intense) closures, as well as adaptation by Palestinian business to the
contours of a constrained West Bank economy". Under a "disengagement scenario"
the Bank predicted a real growth rate of −0.2% in 2006 and −0.6% in 2007.

In the wake of Israel's unilateral disengagement from Gaza, there were
shortages of bread and basic supplies due to closure of the al Mentar/Karni
border-crossing into Israel. Israel's offer to open other crossings was turned
down by the Hamas-run Palestinian authority.

Following the January 2006 legislative elections, decisively won by Hamas, the
Quartet (apart from Russia) cut all funds to the Palestinian Authority led by
prime minister Ismail Haniyah (Hamas). The PA had a monthly cash deficit of
$60 million-$70 million after it received $50 million – $55 million a month
from Israel in taxes and customs duties collected by Israeli officials at the
borders. After the elections, the Palestinian stock market fell about 20%, and
the PA exhausted its borrowing capacity with local banks. Israel ceased
transferring $55 million in tax receipts to the PA. These funds accounted for
a third of the PA's budget and paid the wages of 160,000 Palestinian civil
servants (among them 60,000 security and police officers). The United States
and the European Union halted direct aid to the PA, while the US imposed a
financial blockade on PA's banks, impeding the transfer of some of the Arab
League's funds (e.g. Saudi Arabia and Qatar). In May 2006, hundreds of
Palestinians demonstrated in Gaza and the West Bank demanding payment of their
wages. Tension between Hamas and Fatah rose as a result of this "economic
squeeze" on the PA.

In 2009, the Israeli military removed its checkpoint at the entrance of Jenin
in a series of reductions in security measures. In September 2012, EU
activists stated that the Palestinian economy "lost access to 40% of the West
Bank, 82% of its groundwater and more than two-thirds of its grazing land" due
to the occupation and settlement construction.

The first planned Palestinian city named Rawabi is under construction north of
Ramallah, with the help of funds from Qatar. In 2013, commercial trade between
Israel and the Palestinian territories was valued at US$20 billion annually.

## Sectors

### Agriculture

Agriculture is a mainstay in the economy. The production of agricultural goods
supports the population's sustenance needs and fuels Palestine's export
economy. According to the Council for European Palestinian Relations, the
agricultural sector formally employs 13.4% of the population and informally
employs 90% of the population. Around 183,000 hectares of land in the
Palestinian territories are cultivated, of which around half is used for olive
production. Olive products earn more in export income than any other
agricultural crop.

Over the past 10 years, unemployment rates in Palestine have increased and the
agricultural sector became the most impoverished sector in Palestine.

Palestinian agriculture suffers from numerous problems, blockades to
exportation of produce and importation of necessary inputs, widespread
confiscation of land for nature reserves as well as military and settler use,
confiscation and destruction of wells, and physical barriers within the West
Bank. Because the root of the conflict is with land, the disputes between
Israel and Palestine are well-manifested in the agriculture of Palestine.

### High tech

During the 2000s, a high-tech sector emerged in the Palestinian territories,
supported by its proximity to Israel, and by 2013, 4,500 Palestinians worked
in the IT sector, specializing in software outsourcing (including outsourced
work from Israeli companies), telecommunication development and manufacturing
equipment. The Palestinian IT sector grew from 0.8% of GDP in 2008 to 5% in
2010. The industry has seen a 64% increase in foreign business since 2009. The
majority of Palestinian IT companies are concerted in the city of Ramallah
north of Jerusalem.

Since 2010, Israeli high-tech companies have begun to employ Palestinian
engineers. To date, most of them are outsourced workers, but Mellanox, a
computer hardware firm, plans to hire 15–20 Palestinian engineers as regular
employees. Joint economic cooperation between Israelis and Palestinians
officials has experienced growth over the past years. Starting in 2008, Cisco
Systems began a concerted effort to jump-start the nascent Palestinian IT
sector with a holistic ecosystem approach, encompassing venture capital,
private equity, capacity building and direct outsourcing to Palestinian
companies. The company invested $15 million toward that end and drew in other
major international investors and donors, including Microsoft, HP and Google.
The Palestinian IT sector has since grown from 0.8% of GDP in 2008 to 5% in
2010.

In May 2018, the World Bank published a major report into the Palestinian
technology sector entitled, "Tech startup ecosystem in West Bank and Gaza."
According to the report, as of early 2017, there were 241 active tech start-
ups in Palestinian Territories, which has created a total of 1,247 jobs. The
report also recorded 51 active investors in Palestinian tech companies (around
75 percent angel investors and 25 percent venture capital firms). Among the
major VC firms listed are Sadara Ventures, Ibtikar Fund and Oasis500. Venture
capital firms reported having invested just under US$150 million in over 40
Palestinian tech companies by 2017. The report also recorded 20 start-up
accelerator programs, 19 of which are in the West Bank, and one, Gaza Sky
Geeks, in the Gaza Strip. Today Palestine is known as the "Silicon Valley of
the NGOs".[_citation needed_]

### Traditional industries

A wide variety of handicrafts, many of which have been produced by Arabs in
Palestine for hundreds of years, continue to be produced today. Palestinian
handicrafts include embroidery work, pottery-making, soap-making, glass-
making, weaving, and olive-wood and Mother of Pearl carvings, among others.
Some Palestinian cities in the West Bank, particularly Bethlehem, Hebron and
Nablus have gained renown for specializing in the production of a particular
handicraft, with the sale and export of such items forming a key part of each
city's economy.

Stonecutting is a traditional source of income for the Palestinian economy.
The annual average output per worker in the stone industry is higher than in
any other sector. There are 650 stone production outlets in the West Bank, 138
of them in Beit Fajjar. The quarried material is cut into a rich range of
pink, sand, golden, and off-white bricks and tiles known as Jerusalem stone.

### Tourism

Intercontinental Jacir Palace in Bethlehem

In 2010, 4.6 million people visited the Palestinian territories, compared to
2.6 million in 2009. Of that number, 2.2 million were foreign tourists while
2.7 million were domestic. This number of international visits is misleading,
however, since most tourists come for only a few hours or as part of a day
trip itinerary. In the last quarter of 2012 over 150,000 guests stayed in West
Bank hotels; 40% were European and 9% were from the United States and Canada.
Major travel guides write recently that "the West Bank is not the easiest
place in which to travel but the effort is richly rewarded."

The Palestinian Authority and Israeli tourism ministries have attempted to
work together on tourism in the Palestinian territories in a Joint Committee.
Recent cooperation to share access to foreign tourists has not proven
successful in Palestine for many reasons relating to the occupation. Israel
controls the movement of tourists into the West Bank. Foreign tourism is
presently restricted to East Jerusalem and the West Bank, following the August
2013 indefinite closing of the Rafah crossing located between Egypt and the
Hamas controlled Gaza Strip. There is essentially no tourist flow to Gaza
since 2005 because of the ongoing Israeli military land, air, and sea
blockade.

In 2013 Palestinian Authority Tourism minister Rula Ma'ay'a stated that her
government aims to encourage international visits to Palestine, but the
occupation is the main factor preventing the tourism sector from becoming a
major income source to Palestinians. There are no visa conditions imposed on
foreign nationals other than those imposed by the visa policy of Israel.
Access to Jerusalem and the West Bank is controlled by the Government of
Israel and access to Gaza is controlled by Hamas. Entry to the occupied
Palestinian territories requires only a valid international passport but entry
to Israel may be denied for Palestinians or Arabic visitors. In October 2009,
a new project got underway promoting tourism and travel between the two areas.
New business efforts and tourist attractions have been initiated in Jenin.

A large number of international brands operates their hotels in the
Palestinian territories of both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. These
include Intercontinental Jacir Palace, Seven Arches Hotel Intercontinental,
Marriott Gaza (later Al-Mashtal) and Millennium Palestine Ramallah Hotel. In
1995, Marriott International proposed to construct a business center-cum-
luxury hotel in Gaza. The project was later changed to another hotel, in the
same city.

### Oil and gas

The presence of oil and gas reserves in Palestine has become a contentious
issue, with some advocates suggesting that these fossil fuel resources are
influencing Israel's attacks on the region. According to a 2019 U.N. report,
it is estimated that over 3 billion barrels of oil exist off the coast and
beneath the occupied lands of Palestine. Additionally, the Levant Basin in the
Mediterranean is believed to hold around 1.7 billion barrels of oil, with
another 1.5 billion barrels estimated to lie beneath the occupied West Bank
area. However, under Israeli occupation, Palestinians are not allowed to drill
for oil and gas or develop their independent energy systems, including solar
energy. Meanwhile, Israel has been actively claiming these resources for
itself, approving licenses for companies to explore for more offshore gas
fields. The Israeli government is also interested in building a pipeline to
export gas to European nations, particularly as Europe seeks alternative
energy providers due to the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine.

Many advocates argue that foreign interests in extracting these resources from
Palestinian lands are contributing to the potential genocide faced by
Palestinians. Throughout history, foreign policy in the Middle East has often
revolved around fossil fuels, and this situation seems no different. The
struggle between Israelis and Palestinians dates back to colonial times, with
tensions and conflicts fueled by the desire for community, safety, and control
of the land. The discovery of oil in the region further complicated the
situation, as world powers sought to secure access to this crucial commodity.
The intertwined history of oil and the creation of modern Middle Eastern
states makes it difficult to separate conflicts in the region from the
influence of oil and gas resources. The presence of billions of barrels of oil
in Palestine, combined with the geopolitical interests of various actors, adds
another layer of complexity to the Israel–Palestine conflict. When it comes to
the presence of oil and gas reserves in Palestine, there is an ongoing
conflict between Israel and Palestine over the ownership and exploitation of
these resources. In 1999, a gas field was discovered about 20 miles off the
coast of Gaza. However, negotiations between Israel and Palestine to divide
these resources were disrupted by the Second Intifada, or Palestinian
uprisings, which began in 2000.

Under international law, the oil and gas resources in Palestine should belong
to the occupied territory and not the occupying power (Israel). However,
Israel has been benefiting from the oil and gas reserves beneath Palestinian
lands and waters. Palestine has been unable to access these resources,
resulting in a loss of billions of dollars of economic potential. Moreover,
there are concerns about the environmental impact of fossil fuel extraction,
and Palestinian activists are pushing for a focus on renewable energy instead.
The international community's complicity in the ongoing Israeli occupation and
the conflict in Gaza is seen by some as intricately tied to capitalist
interests and the pursuit of profit. The history of colonialism and the
extraction of oil resources in the Middle East is seen as part of the wider
context of the Israel-Palestine conflict. While some argue that fossil fuels
have a marginal role in the conflict, others believe that religious ideology,
geopolitical strategies, and access to trading routes play a bigger role.
Overall, the conflict in Palestine and the pursuit of oil and gas resources
have deep historical and geopolitical roots that contribute to the ongoing
tensions in the region.

Palestine holds massive potential reserves of oil and gas. Over 3 billion
barrels (480,000,000 m3) of oil are estimated to exist off the coast and
beneath occupied Palestinian lands. The Levant Basin holds around 1.7 billion
barrels (270,000,000 m3) of oil, with another 1.5 billion barrels (240,000,000
m3) barrels beneath the occupied West Bank area. Around 2 billion barrels
(320,000,000 m3) of oil reserves are believed to exist in shore of the Gaza
Strip. According to a report by the UNCTAD, around 1,250 billion barrels
(1.99×1011 m3) of oil reserves are in the occupied Palestinian territory of
the West Bank, probably the Meged oil field. As per the Palestinian Authority,
80% of this oil field falls under the lands owned by Palestinians.

Masadder, a subsidiary of the Palestine Investment Fund is developing the
oilfield in the West Bank. Block-1 field, which spans an area of 432 square
kilometres (167 sq mi) from northwest Ramallah to Qalqilya in Palestine, has
significant potential for recoverable hydrocarbon resources. It is estimated
to have a P90 (a level of certainty) of 0.03 billion barrels (4,800,000 m3) of
recoverable oil and 6,000,000,000 cubic feet (170,000,000 m3). The estimated
cost for the development of the field is $390 million, and it will be carried
out under a production sharing agreement with the Government of Palestine.
Currently, an initial pre-exploration work program is underway to prepare for
designing an exploration plan for approval, which will precede the full-
fledged development of the field.

Natural gas in Palestine is mostly found in Gaza Strip. Gaza Marine is a
natural gas field, located around 32 kilometres (20 mi) from the coast of the
territory in the Mediterranean shore. It holds gas reserves ranging between 28
billion cubic metres (990 billion cubic feet) to 32 billion cubic metres (1.1
trillion cubic feet). These estimates far exceed the needs of the Palestinian
territories in energy. The gas field was discovered by the British Gas Group
in 1999. Upon the discovery of the gas field, it was lauded by Yasser Arafat
as a "Gift from God". A regional cooperation between the Palestinian
Authority, Israel and Egypt were signed for developing the field and Hamas
also gave approval to the Palestinian Authority. However, since the ongoing
Gaza war, this project have been delayed.

## Infrastructure

### Communications

The World Bank estimated in 2016 that restrictive measures placed by Israel on
telecommunication operators in the West Bank have had a notable negative
impact on the development of the Palestinian telecommunications networks,
which is sustaining losses in the range of $1 billion. These restrictive
measures include the denial to operate in 60% of the West Bank under Israeli
military administration (Area C), limitations on the importation of technology
for ICT companies, requiring Palestinian operators to access international
links via a company with Israeli registration, delaying in the provision of
mobile broadband, the failure to set in place an independent regulator for the
sector in the territories, and Israeli operators who lack appropriate
authorizations who continue to operate in the Palestinian market.

### Transport

### Water supply and sanitation

## By sub-region

### West Bank

In 2007, the economy in the West Bank improved gradually. Economic growth
reached about 4–5% and unemployment dropped about 3%. Israeli figures
indicated that wages in the West Bank rose more than 20% in 2008 and trade
rose about 35%. Tourism in Bethlehem increased to about twice its previous
levels, and tourism increased by 50% in Jericho. Life expectancy is 73.4,
placing the territories 77th in the world, compared with a life expectancy of
72.5 in Jordan, 71.8 in Turkey, and 80.7 in Israel. Car sales in 2008 were
double those of 2007. The International Monetary Fund report for the West Bank
forecast a 7% growth rate for 2009.

The Bethlehem Small Enterprise Center opened in early 2008. Funded by Germany,
the center has helped to promote computer literacy and marketing skills.

View of Bethlehem

In 2009, efforts continued to build Palestinian local institutions and
governments from the ground up. Much of this work was done by Tony Blair and
US General Keith Dayton. Some analysts saw this as a more substantial way to
lay a groundwork for viable institutions and for local peace. In August 2009,
a state of the art web-based system for tracking goods coming in and out of
the area by Palestinian customs was launched in partnership with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development.

In 2009, an economic "boom" began with growth reaching 8 percent, higher than
in Israel or the West. However, with inflation around 9.9% that same year,
real economic growth is actually negative insofar as purchasing power has
decreased. Tourism to Bethlehem, which had doubled to 1 million in 2008, rose
to nearly 1.5 million in 2009. New car imports increased by 44 percent. New
shopping malls opened in Jenin and Nablus. As an outcome of the Palestine
Investment Conference, Palestinian developers are planning to build the first
modern Palestinian city, Rawabi.

Bank of Palestine, Ramallah

In 2010, Ramallah was described as a hub of the economic activity thanks to
improved security within the city, successful battle against corruption and
large consumer base.

In 2011, the Palestinian Planning Minister said that GDP growth was expected
to reach 9%, rising to 10% in 2012 and 12% in 2013.

### East Jerusalem

East Jerusalem was once the business and shopping hub of the West Bank.
However, since the advent of Israeli security checkpoints and the separation
barrier starting over a decade ago, it has become isolated from its customer
base leading to serious economic decline. According to Hanna Siniora of the
Palestinian-American Chamber of Commerce, the turning point was 1993. He
states that since then East Jerusalem has become a closed city through
isolation from the rest of the West Bank causing a loss of 50% of its business
between 1993 and 2001.

According to a 2012 report by the Association for Civil Rights in Israel and
interviews conducted by the Forward, the decline of the economy in East
Jerusalem has led to unprecedented levels of poverty, with 80% of the
Palestinian population living below the poverty line. The main cause is seen
as the political and physical barriers separating it from the rest of the West
Bank. The ACRI report attributing the problem to "'the cumulative effects of
annexation, neglect, rights violations and the completion of the separation
barrier." Another contributing factor to the economic decline is the housing
situation. The Israeli government has facilitated extensive construction for
Israeli settler neighborhoods, but has severely restricted development and
building for the Palestinian population.

### Gaza Strip

Gaza City

According to CIA's _The World Factbook_ , Israel's closure policy, which was
extended when the Hamas administration came to power in 2007, was responsible
for high levels of poverty and unemployment and a significant decline of the
private sector which was heavily reliant upon export markets. Israel blamed
Hamas for taking actions that led to the closure policy. A large part of the
population is dependent on humanitarian assistance, primarily from the UN
agencies.

An easing of Israel's closure policy in 2010 resulted in an improvement in
some economic indicators, but regular exports from the Gaza Strip were still
prohibited. According to the Israeli Defense Forces, the economy improved in
2011, with a drop in unemployment and an increase in GDP. New malls have
opened, local industry is developing and the economic upswing has led to the
construction of hotels and a rise in the import of cars. Wide-scale
development has been made possible by the unhindered movement of goods into
Gaza through the Kerem Shalom Crossing and tunnels between the Gaza Strip and
Egypt. The current rate of trucks entering Gaza through Kerem Shalom is 250
trucks per day. This figure fluctuates depending on the level of interference
with goods being brought into Gaza from Egypt through tunnels. The increase in
building activity has led to a shortage of construction workers. To make up
for the deficit, young people are being sent to learn the trade in Turkey.

## Currency

Under the Protocol on Economic Relations, the Palestinians are not allowed to
independently introduce a separate Palestinian currency. Instead, the Israeli
new shekel is the main currency of the Palestinian territories. In the West
Bank the Jordanian dinar is also used. The shekel is used for most
transactions, especially retail, while the dinar is used more for savings and
durable goods transactions. The United States dollar is also sometimes used
for savings and for purchasing foreign goods. The dollar is used by the
overwhelming majority of transactions overseen by the Palestinian Monetary
Authority (that functions as Palestine's central bank), which only represent a
fraction of the transactions conducted in Palestine or by Palestinians.

In the Gaza Strip, the shekel is also the main currency, though it is in short
supply due to the blockade of the Gaza Strip by the PA, Israel and Egypt.

Because the Palestinian Monetary Authority does not issue its own currency, it
is therefore unable to pursue an independent and effective monetary policy. At
the same time, the use of multiple currencies increases the costs and creates
inconvenience arising from fluctuating exchange rates.

## Taxation

Taxation in the Palestinian territories is a complex system which may involve
payment to the Palestinian Authority (PA) and/or Israel. In 2005, the PA
collected approximately $34 million per month from taxes and other charges,
while Israel collected about $75 million per month in tariffs on foreign
imports and value added taxes (VAT) on Israeli goods and services and on
average retained about $15 million for the payment of water and power bills of
Palestinians, while forwarding the other $60 million to the PA. Israeli
collected funds account for about two-thirds of the PA's self-generated
revenue, which Reuters put at $100 million in December 2012. Since the 2006
Palestinian legislative election and the formation of a Hamas government in
the PA, Israel has regularly withheld the taxes it owes the PA.

## Employment

According to the Council for European Palestinian Relations, the agricultural
sector formally employs 13.4% of the population and informally employs 90% of
the population. Over the past 10 years, unemployment rates in Palestine have
increased and the agricultural sector became the most impoverished sector in
Palestine. Unemployment rates peaked in 2008 when they reached 41% in Gaza.

### By Israelis

High unemployment in the Palestinian economy led about 100,000 Palestinians to
work in Israel. By March 2014, about 45,000 permits were issued for work in
Israel with further 25,000 issued for work in West Bank settlements. It is
estimated 35,000 Palestinian work through illegal channels and without a
permit. Recently[_when?_] the quota for permits has increased and minimum age
for obtaining one was reduced from 26 to 24. Sectors in which Palestinians are
employed include construction, manufacturing, commerce and agriculture.

As of 2013, average daily wages in Israel and the settlements is nearly 2.2
times higher than in the private sector in the West Bank and over 4 times that
in Gaza. As of 2022, Palestinian monthly minimum wage is ₪1,450, almost a
quarter of the Israeli minimum wage of ₪5,300. In the West Bank, Israeli
labour laws are partially applied through military enactments, and a ruling of
the Supreme Court of Israel of 2007 apply the law for work done inside Israeli
settlements. Yet, there have been incidents where Israeli employers did not
fulfill their legal obligations to the employees by refusing to provide a
paycheck or hide the number of work hours to avoid labour laws such as minimum
wage or social security benefits.

In 2014, an article published on Al-Hayat Al-Jadida, the Palestinian
Authority's official daily, praised Israeli treatment of Palestinian workers.
With having added benefits such as transportation, medical and pensions,
Palestinians are quick to leave their Palestinian employers and work for
Israelis, whenever they have the opportunity to do so. Safety rules are
enforced strictly by Israeli Workers' Union and physical examinations are done
by doctors. The PA has passed labour laws but do not enforce rules such as the
minimum wage, annual vacations, sick leave or extra payments for overtime
work.

## Foreign aid

In 2008, the West Bank and Gaza economies were heavily reliant on foreign aid
which stood at 1.8 billion[_clarification needed_]. Approximately 30% of the
GDP, or US$487 per Palestinian per year came from aid. Foreign aid provided
essential services for nearly half of the Palestinian people, and allowed the
Palestinian Authority to operate and pay its estimated 140,000 employees.

In 2010, Arab states cut financial aid to the Palestinian Authority. According
to the Palestinian Finance Ministry, the PA received $583.5 million in budget
support by August 2010, of which only 22 percent came from Arab states. The
remainder was from international donors, including the European Union and the
United States. Salah Rafat, a member of the PLO Executive Committee, urged the
Arab countries to honor their financial pledges.

In April 2011, Salam Fayyad met with Western donors in Brussels and requested
$5 billion in aid.

As part of a 2013 effort to inspire peace talks between Israelis and
Palestinians, US Secretary of State John Kerry proposed a $4 billion plan of
private investment in the Palestinian economy. The plan was described as
having the potential to significantly grow the economy of the West Bank, but
no specifics were provided as to what projects were envisioned, who would
invest the money, or what modifications might be required in Israel's
restrictions on the West Bank for the plan to work. The proposal was
coordinated in association with the Quartet, a Middle East peacemaking group
comprising the United States, Russia, the European Union and the United
Nations, for which former UK Prime Minister Tony Blair served as an envoy. The
Palestinian Authority responded by indicating that it would not trade its
political aspirations for economic aid, but was assured that the plan was
meant as a complement to negotiations, and not as a substitute. Peace talks
failed for unrelated reasons without any implementation of the proposal.

## Israeli–Palestinian relations

### Commerce

Olives of Peace is a joint Israeli–Palestinian business venture to sell olive
oil. Through this project, Israelis and Palestinians have carried out joint
training sessions and planning. The oil is sold under the brand name "Olives
of Peace."

The two regions are planning a joint industrial zone which would bridge the
border. Palestinians would produce locally-made handicrafts and sell them
through Gilboa to other regions of the world. Another possible project is a
joint language center, where Israelis and Palestinians would teach each other
Arabic and Hebrew, as well as aspects of their cultural heritage.

In 2011, bilateral trade between Israel and the Palestinian-ruled areas
reached $4.3 billion, with Israeli exports to the PA amounting to $3.5 billion
and Palestinian exports to Israel amounting to $816 million. According to
Nader Tamimi, chair of the Association of Traditional Industries in the PA,
there are regular interactions between Palestinian and Israeli businessmen.

At a conference hosted by the Faculty of Business and Management at Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev in 2012, Israeli and Palestinian trade experts met to
discuss ways of promoting cross-border business interactions.

In 2013, commercial trade between Israel and the Palestinian Authority were
valued at US$20 billion annually. The continuously increasing transactions led
to the creation of the joint Palestinian and Israeli initiative, the Jerusalem
Arbitration Center (JAC). The center will specialize as an independent
institution focusing on business arbitration between Israelis and
Palestinians.

Due to the clearance crisis with Israel, the Palestinian economy was severely
hit in terms of public finances, according to the World Bank's report in 2019.
World Bank Acting Country Director for West Bank Gaza Anna Bjerde said, "The
economy, which in 2018 saw no real growth, is now facing a severe fiscal shock
because of the standoff over clearance revenue transfers." The report states,
"Against a background of declining aid flows, the recent standoff stemmed from
Israel’s unilateral deduction of US$138 million from the PA’s clearance
revenues in 2019 to offset estimated payouts to Palestinian martyrs and
prisoners' families."

### Conflict

In 2006, the unity of the Palestinian economy was fractured following Fatah-
Hamas split prompting Israel to sever direct ties between the West Bank and
Gaza. The following war in 2008–2009 destroyed most of the economic
infrastructure of the Gaza Strip and left the Palestinian economy without any
remaining activity and $1.4 billion in debt. The Oslo Accords in 1993 aimed to
prevent this, but was unable to keep the Palestinian economy from fluctuating.
Currently, the Palestinian economy lives on foreign aid and customs revenue
between Israel and Palestine. However, Israeli restrictions continue to hamper
and fragment the Palestinian economy. By 2008, 71% of the Gaza Strip's
population was unemployed. The import and export prosperity in Palestine was
impacted by the border restrictions and constant Israeli control in the West
Bank and Gaza, which also weakened the industrial and agricultural sectors. In
order for the Palestinian economy to prosper, the restrictions on Palestinian
land must be removed. In the West Bank, the Israeli restrictions caused the
Palestinian economy to lose $3.4bn (35% of the annual GDP), according to _The
Guardian_ and a World Bank report.

Unemployment in Gaza and the West Bank  | 2000  | 2001  | 2002  | 2003  | 2004  | 2005  | 2006  | 2007  | 2008   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Percentage  | 12.5%  | 21%  | 32%  | 26%  | 27.5%  | 24.5%  | 23%  | 21.5%  | 26.5%   
  
## Macroeconomic data

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1994–2023. Inflation
below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP  
(in bn. US$PPP) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ PPP) | GDP  
(in bn. US$ nominal) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ nominal) | GDP growth  
(real) | Inflation rate  
(in Percent) | Unemployment  
(in Percent) | Government debt  
(in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1994  | 5.85  | 2,524  | 2.84  | 1,227  | n/a  | n/a  | 18.6%  | n/a   
1995  | 6.40  | 2,575  | 3.28  | 1,322  | 7.1%  | n/a  | 18.7%  | n/a   
1996  | 6.59  | 2,506  | 3.41  | 1,296  | 1.2%  | n/a  | 23.5%  | n/a   
1997  | 7.69  | 2,763  | 3.76  | 1,351  | 14.7%  | 7.6%  | 20.1%  | n/a   
1998  | 8.89  | 3,096  | 4.07  | 1,417  | 14.3%  | 5.6%  | 14.2%  | n/a   
1999  | 9.76  | 3,295  | 4.27  | 1,442  | 8.3%  | 5.5%  | 11.8%  | n/a   
2000  | 9.13  | 2,990  | 4.31  | 1,413  | −8.6%  | 2.8%  | 14.3%  | 20.0%   
2001  | 8.47  | 2,697  | 4.00  | 1,276  | −9.3%  | 1.2%  | 25.3%  | 22.2%   
2002  | 7.52  | 2,333  | 3.56  | 1,103  | −12.5%  | 5.7%  | 31.2%  | 20.9%   
2003  | 8.75  | 2,639  | 3.97  | 1,197  | 14.0%  | 4.4%  | 25.5%  | 20.7%   
2004  | 10.95  | 3,214  | 4.60  | 1,351  | 21.9%  | 3.0%  | 26.8%  | 21.1%   
2005  | 12.57  | 3,583  | 5.13  | 1,461  | 11.3%  | 5.3%  | 23.5%  | 24.0%   
2006  | 12.83  | 3,552  | 5.35  | 1,481  | −1.0%  | 3.8%  | 23.7%  | 19.3%   
2007  | 13.68  | 3,677  | 5.82  | 1,564  | 3.8%  | 1.9%  | 21.7%  | 23.7%   
2008  | 14.97  | 3,919  | 7.31  | 1,913  | 7.4%  | 9.9%  | 26.6%  | 23.0%   
2009  | 16.36  | 4,171  | 8.09  | 2,062  | 8.6%  | 2.8%  | 24.5%  | 24.0%   
2010  | 17.52  | 4,354  | 9.68  | 2,406  | 5.8%  | 3.8%  | 23.7%  | 22.7%   
2011  | 19.59  | 4,750  | 11.19  | 2,712  | 9.6%  | 2.9%  | 20.9%  | 26.3%   
2012  | 21.18  | 5,010  | 12.21  | 2,889  | 6.1%  | 2.8%  | 23.0%  | 29.8%   
2013  | 22.55  | 5,210  | 13.52  | 3,123  | 4.7%  | 1.7%  | 23.4%  | 30.2%   
2014  | 22.91  | 5,171  | 13.99  | 3,159  | −0.2%  | 1.7%  | 26.9%  | 34.0%   
2015  | 23.98  | 5,293  | 13.97  | 3,084  | 3.7%  | 1.4%  | 25.9%  | 37.1%   
2016  | 26.35  | 5,689  | 15.41  | 3,326  | 8.9%  | −0.2%  | 26.9%  | 31.0%   
2017  | 27.20  | 5,747  | 16.13  | 3,407  | 1.4%  | 0.2%  | 25.5%  | 31.8%   
2018  | 28.40  | 5,851  | 16.28  | 3,353  | 1.2%  | −0.2%  | 26.3%  | 33.1%   
2019  | 30.49  | 6,127  | 17.13  | 3,443  | 1.4%  | 1.6%  | 25.4%  | 34.5%   
2020  | 28.61  | 5,608  | 15.53  | 3,045  | −11.3%  | −0.7%  | 25.9%  | 47.1%   
2021  | 27.88  | 5,333  | 18.11  | 3,464  | 7.0%  | 1.2%  | 26.4%  | 50.2%   
2022  | 31.09  | 5,805  | 19.17  | 3,579  | 4.1%  | 3.7%  | 24.4%  | 47.1%   
2023  | 30.46  | 5,562  | 17.42  | 3,181  | −5.4%  | 5.9%  | n/a  | 49.7%   
  
## Development indicators

**School enrollment, primary (%) gross:** 94% in 2012

**CO 2 Emission (metric tons per capita):** 0.6 in 2010

**Poverty rate:** 25.8% in 2011

**Improved water source rural:** 82% in 2012

**Life expectancy at birth total years:** 73 in 2012

**GNI per capita (current US $):** $2,810 in 2012

**Population:** 4,169,509 in 2013