The **economy of Kenya** is market-based with a few state enterprises. Kenya
has an emerging market and is an averagely industrialised nation ahead of its
East African peers. Currently a lower middle income nation, Kenya plans to be
a newly industrialised nation by 2030. The major industries driving the Kenyan
economy include financial services, agriculture, real estate, manufacturing,
logistics, tourism, retail and energy. As of 2020, Kenya had the third largest
economy in Sub-Saharan Africa, behind Nigeria and South Africa. Regionally,
Kenya has had a stronger and more stable economy compared to its neighboring
countries within East Africa. By 2023, the country had become Africa's largest
start-up hub by both funds invested and number of projects.

The government of Kenya is generally investment-friendly and has enacted
several regulatory reforms to simplify foreign and local investment, including
the creation of an export processing zone. An increasingly significant portion
of Kenya's foreign financial inflows are remittances by Kenyans in the
Diaspora, who work in the United States, the Middle East, Europe and Asia.
According to data by the Central Bank of Kenya, remittances from Kenyans
living abroad make up over 3.4 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

As of September 2018, economic prospects were positive, with above 6% gross
domestic product (GDP) growth expected. This growth was attributed largely to
expansions in the telecommunications, transport, and construction sectors; a
recovery in agriculture; and the rise of small businesses helping to pull the
economy. These improvements are supported by a large pool of highly educated
professional workers. There is a high level of IT literacy and innovation,
especially among young Kenyans.

In 2020, Kenya ranked 56th in the World Bank ease of doing business rating, up
from 61st in 2019 (of 190 countries). Compared to its neighbours, Kenya has a
well-developed social and physical infrastructure.

## History

Between 70 AD and 1500 AD, trade routes — spanning Africa, Asia and Europe —
integrated the Kenyan coastal strip into the world economy. Foreign merchants
would bring their merchandise to the Kenyan coast and leave with African
goods.

In 1499 AD, Vasco da Gama, a Portuguese explorer, returned to Europe after
discovering the sea route to India through South Africa. This new route
allowed European nations to dominate the trade economy of the East African
coast, with the Portuguese entrenching themselves in the 16th and 17th
centuries. In the 18th century, the Portuguese were replaced in this East
African economic corridor by Omani Arabs. Eventually, the British replaced the
Omani Arabs. In 1895 they dominated the coastal strip; by 1920, they had
followed the interior trade routes all the way to the Buganda Kingdom. To make
this ancient economic trade route more profitable, the British used Indian
labourers to build a railway from Mombasa at the coast to Kampala, the capital
of Buganda kingdom, following old trade routes. Major towns were founded along
the railway line, backed by European settler farming communities. The Indian
labourers who did not return to India after railway construction ended were
the first to establish shops (dukawallahs) in these towns.

During the colonial period, the European settler farming community and the
Indian dukawallahs established the foundations of the modern formal Kenyan
economy. Prominent examples of Asian-Kenyan business owners whose businesses
started as dukawallahs include Manu Chandaria and Madatally Manji. While
Europeans and Indians enjoyed strong economic growth between 1920 and 1963,
Africans were deprived of their land, dehumanised, and forced to work for
minimal pay under extremely poor working conditions through a well-established
system of racial segregation.

Kenya gained its independence in 1963. Under President Jomo Kenyatta, the
Kenyan government promoted africanisation of the Kenyan economy, generating
rapid economic growth through public investment, encouragement of smallholder
agricultural production, and incentives for private, often foreign, industrial
investments. An influential sessional paper authored by Tom Mboya and Mwai
Kibaki in 1965 stressed the need for Kenya to avoid both the capitalistic
economy of the West and the communism of the East. The paper argued that Kenya
should instead concentrate on African socialism, while avoiding linking
Kenya's economic fortunes to any country or group of countries. From 1963 to
1973, GDP grew at an annual average rate of 6.6%; during the 1970s, it grew at
an average rate of 7.2%. Agricultural production grew by 4.7% annually in the
same period, stimulated by redistributing estates, distributing new crop
strains, and opening new areas to cultivation. However, the rate of GDP growth
declined to 4.2% per year in the 1980s, and 2.2% a year in the 1990s.

Kenya's policy of import substitution, which started in 1946 with European and
Asian enterprises, did not achieve the desired result of transforming Kenya's
industrial base. In the late 1970s, rising oil prices began to make Kenya's
manufacturing sector noncompetitive. In response, the government began a
massive intervention in the private sector. Lack of export incentives, tight
import controls, and foreign exchange controls made the domestic environment
for investment even less attractive.

In the 1980s and 1990s, Kenya signed structural adjustment loans with the
World Bank and IMF, the loans were to be given on the condition that Kenya
adopts government reforms, a liberal trade and interest rate regime, and an
outward-oriented industrial policy, among other reforms. The Kenyan economy
performed very poorly during this era of World Bank and IMF-driven
liberalisation at the height of Daniel Arap Moi administration.

From 1991 to 1993, Kenya had its worst economic performance since
independence. Growth in GDP stagnated, and agricultural production shrank at
an annual rate of 3.9%. Inflation reached a record of 100% in August 1993, and
the government's budget deficit was over 10% of GDP. As a result of these
issues, bilateral and multilateral donors suspended their aid programmes in
Kenya in 1991.

In 1993, the Kenyan government began a major programme of economic reform and
liberalisation. A new minister of finance and a new governor of the central
bank undertook a series of economic measures with the assistance of the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The government eliminated
price controls and import licensing, removed foreign exchange controls,
privatised a number of publicly owned companies, reduced the number of civil
servants, and introduced conservative fiscal and monetary policies. From 1994
to 1996, Kenya's real GDP growth rate averaged just over 4% a year.

Kenya's economic performance since independence.

In 1997, however, the economy entered a period of slow growth, due in part to
adverse weather conditions and reduced economic activity before the general
elections in December 1997. In July 1997, the Government of Kenya refused to
meet earlier commitments to the IMF on governance reforms. As a result, the
IMF suspended lending for three years, and the World Bank put a $90 million
structural adjustment credit on hold.

The Kenyan government subsequently took positive steps on reform, including
the establishment of the Kenya Anti-Corruption Authority in 1997. The state
also implemented measures to improve the transparency of government
procurement and reduce the government payroll. In July 2000, the IMF signed a
$150 million Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, and the World Bank
followed shortly after with a $157 million Economic and Public Sector Reform
credit. However, both were eventually suspended. Despite setbacks, the process
of reform established Kenya as East Africa's economic powerhouse and the
region's business hub.

Economic growth improved between 2003 and 2008, under the Mwai Kibaki
administration. When Kibaki took power in 2003, he immediately established the
National Debt Management Department at the treasury, reformed the Kenya
Revenue Authority (KRA) to increase government revenue, reformed financial
laws on banking, wrote off the debts of strategic public enterprises, and
ensured that 30% of government tax revenue was invested in economic
development projects. With these reforms, driven by the National Rainbow
Coalition government, the KRA collected more tax revenue in 2004 than was
anticipated. The government then initiated investments in infrastructure. By
2005, the Kenyan public debt had reduced from highs of 80% of GDP in 2002 to
27% of GDP in 2005. The financial sector greatly improved, and Equity Bank
Kenya became one of the largest banks in East Africa. Economic growth improved
from 2% in 2003 to 7% in 2007. In 2008, the growth slumped to 1% due to post-
election violence before returning to an average of 5% between 2009 and 2013.
However, in 2009, due to drought and the 2008 financial crisis, high input
costs as well as a fall in demand for some of the country's exports caused the
agriculture sector to contract by 2.7%.

Between 2013 and 2018, under the Jubilee Party government led by Uhuru
Kenyatta, the GDP growth averaged above 5%. Growth in small businesses is
credited with some of the improvement. Real GDP growth (annualised) was 5.7%
in Q1 of 2018, 6.0% in Q2 2018 and 6.2% in Q3 2018. Despite this robust
growth, concerns remained about Kenya's debt sustainability, current account
deficit, fiscal consolidation and revenue growth.

The table below shows the GDP of Kenya estimated Archived 11 June 2010 at the
Wayback Machine by the International Monetary Fund, with exchange rates for
Kenyan shillings.

Year | Nominal GDP(USD) | US Dollar Exchange   
---|---|---  
1980 | 7.265 billion | 7.42 shillings   
1985 | 6.135 billion | 16.43 shillings   
1990 | 8.591 billion | 22.86 shillings   
1995 | 9.046 billion | 50.42 shillings   
2000 | 12.71 billion | 78.58 shillings   
2005 | 18.74 billion | 75.55 shillings   
2010 | 40 billion | 78.90 shillings   
2015 | 63.77 billion | 96.85 shillings   
2020 | 101.1 billion | 107 shillings   
  
## Vision 2030 plan

Vision 2030 is Kenya's current blueprint for its economic future, with the
goal of creating a prosperous, globally-competitive nation with a high quality
of life by 2030. The plan aims to transform Kenyan industry and environment in
three pillars: economic, social, and political.

### Economic pillar

Vision 2030 seeks economic growth averaging greater than 10% for 23 years,
beginning in the year 2007. Economic areas targeted are tourism, agriculture,
wholesale and retail trade, manufacturing, IT-enabled services, and financial
services.

### Social pillar

To improve the quality of life for Kenyans, Vision 2030 aims to improve human
and social welfare programmes, specifically education and training, health,
environment, housing and urbanisation, children and social development, and
youth and sports. In 2018, President Uhuru Kenyatta established the Big Four
Agenda, focusing on universal healthcare, manufacturing, affordable housing
and food security.

### Political pillar

The political pillar envisions a "democratic system that is issue-based,
transparent, people-centred, results-oriented, and accountable to the public".
It targets five main areas: the rule of law under the Constitution of Kenya,
electoral and political processes, democracy and public service delivery,
transparency and accountability, and security, peace building, and conflict
management.

The current Constitution of Kenya was inaugurated on 27 August 2010 to drive
this pillar.

## Currency, exchange rate, and inflation

Kenya's currency is printed by mandate of the Central Bank of Kenya. The bank
began printing banknotes in 1996. Several versions of Kenya's banknotes and
coinage have been circulated since then. The most recent redesign of Kenya's
currency was in 2019.

The exchange rate of the Kenyan Shilling between 2003 and 2010 averaged about
KSh74-78 per US Dollar.

The average inflation between 2005 and July 2015 was 8.5%. In July 2015
Kenya's inflation rate was estimated to be 6.62%.

## Government finances

### Revenue and spending

In 2006, Kenyan government revenue totalled US$4.448B and its estimated
expenditures totalled US$5.377B. The government budget balance as a percentage
of the gross domestic product improved to −2.1% in 2006 from −5.5% in 2004.

In 2012, Kenya set a budget of US$14.59B with a government revenue of
approximately US$12B.

The 2018 budget policy report set a budget of US$30B. The government revenue
was approximately US$29.5B, and a deficit of US$5B was borrowed.

In the financial year that ended in June 2020, the Kenya Revenue Authority
collected a tax revenue that amounted to approximately US$15B.

### Government debt

From 1982, Kenya key public debt indicators rose above critical levels, both
measured as a percentage of GDP and as a percentage of government revenue.

In 2002, the last year of Daniel arap Moi's administration, Kenya' s public
debt stood at almost 80% of GDP. In the last 10 years of the Moi regime, the
government was spending 94% of all its revenue on salaries and debt servicing
to the IMF, World Bank and other western countries.

In 2003, Mwai Kibaki's administration instituted a public debt management
department within the treasury department to bring Kenya's debt down to
sustainable levels.

In 2006, Kenya had a current account deficit of US$1.5B. This figure was a
significant increase over 2005, when the current account had a deficit of
US$495 million. In 2006, the current account balance as a percentage of gross
domestic product was −4.2.

In 2006, Kenya's external debt totalled US$6.7B. With a GDP of US$25.83B in
2006, the public debt level stood at 27% of GDP.

In 2011, the national treasury noted that the debt was rising, growing to 40%
of GDP in 2009 and to 54% of GDP by 2012.

In 2019, Kenya's debt had risen to an absolute amount of US$50B against a GDP
of US$98B. The public debt level was 51% of GDP in 2019.

In 2021, Kenya's debt had risen to an absolute amount of US$65B against a GDP
of US$101B.The public debt level was 65% of GDP in 2021.

Kenya's largest bilateral lender since 2011 has been China, and the largest
multilateral lender since 1963 has been the World Bank.

In April 2025, Kenya secured $600 million in short-term financing from
commercial banks to support road construction projects, amid persistent
budgetary pressures stemming from sluggish tax revenue growth, high debt
servicing costs, and increased spending obligations, including at the county
level. The financing, backed by securitised collections from the national fuel
levy, set at 18 Kenyan shillings (approximately $0.14) per litre, was arranged
through the Kenya Roads Board to enable access to more affordable credit.
According to Finance Minister John Mbadi, the funds will be directed toward
paying contractors for urgent road maintenance while the government continues
to pursue a larger funding arrangement, potentially a $1.5 billion privately
placed bond or syndicated loan. This initiative complements broader efforts by
President William Ruto’s administration, which came into office in September
2022, to address infrastructure financing gaps. Separately, Kenya plans to
issue Africa’s first sustainability-linked bond by November 2025, targeting
$500 million to support the national budget and contribute to environmental,
social, and energy-related goals. This move is part of the government's
strategy to manage an anticipated budget deficit of 3.9% of GDP for the fiscal
year ending June 2025.

### Economic Stimulus Programme

The Kenya Economic Stimulus Programme was introduced in the 2010–2011 budget
plan.[82] The initiative aimed to stimulate economic activity in Kenya through
investment in long-term solutions to food insecurity, rural unemployment, and
underdevelopment. Business loans in Kenya were a key component of this
strategy, providing much-needed financial support to small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) to drive growth and innovation. Stated improvement
objectives included regional development for equity and social stability,
infrastructure, education, affordable health care, environmental conservation,
information and communications technology capacity, and access to IT.[83]

### Integrated Financial Management Information System

The Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) was launched in
2003 as a digital platform for Kenya's financial information and services, and
was later re-engineered by the Ministry of Finance to curb fraud and other
malpractices. IFMIS enables integrated budget planning, being linked to
planning policy objectives and budget allocation.

### Funds for the Inclusion of Informal Sector

The Fund for the Inclusion of Informal Sector (FIIS) is a fund that allows
businesses in the informal economy to access credit financing and other
facilities, including financial and banking services.

### Investor compensation fund

The Investor Compensation Fund compensates investors who suffer losses from
breaches of duty by a licensed stockbroker or dealer, up to a maximum of
Sh.50,000 per investor.

## Foreign economic relations

Kenyan exports.

Foreign investments in Kenya remain relatively weak considering the size of
its economy and its level of development. As of 2022, Kenya's total FDI stock
stood at USD 10.4 billion, accounting for a mere 9.5% of the country’s GDP.

Investments come from China, Japan, Russia, the United States, and the United
Kingdom, among others. Kenya hosts a number of foreign multinational companies
and international organisations such as the United Nations Environment
Programme. China's investments have been increasing, while those of western
countries such as the United Kingdom has fallen significantly. Investments
from multilateral agencies, particularly the World Bank and the European
Development Fund, have also increased. The most active investors currently are
the Chinese.

Kenya is active within regional trade blocs such as the Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa and the East African Community, a partnership of
Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan. The aim of the
latter is to create a common market of its member states modelled on the
European Union. Among the early steps toward integration is the bloc's customs
union, which has eliminated duties on goods and non-tariff trade barriers
among members.

### Exports

Kenya's chief exports are horticultural products and tea. In 2005, the
combined value of these commodities was US$1,150 million, about 10 times the
value of Kenya's third most valuable export, coffee. Kenya's other significant
exports are petroleum products, fish, cement, pyrethrum, and sisal. The
leading imports are crude petroleum, chemicals, manufactured goods, machinery,
and transportation equipment. Africa is Kenya's largest export market,
followed by the European Union.

The major destinations for exports are Uganda, Tanzania, the United Kingdom,
and the Netherlands. Major suppliers are China, India, the United Arab
Emirates, Saudi Arabia, and South Africa. Kenya's main exports to the United
States are garments traded under the terms of the African Growth and
Opportunity Act. Notwithstanding this, Kenya's apparel industry is struggling
to hold its ground against Asian competition and runs a trade deficit with the
United States. Many of Kenya's problems relating to the export of goods are
believed by economists to be caused by the fact that Kenya's exports are
inexpensive items that do not bring substantial amounts of money into the
country.

Kenya is the dominant trade partner for Uganda (12.3% exports, 15.6% imports)
and Rwanda (30.5% exports, 17.3% imports).

### Balance of trade

Kenya typically has a substantial trade deficit. The trade balance fluctuates
widely because Kenya's main exports are primary commodities subject to the
effects of both world prices and weather. In 2005 Kenya's income from exports
was about US$3.2 billion. The payment for imports was about US$5.7B, yielding
a trade deficit of about US$2.5B.

Year  | Goods exports  
(million US$) | Goods imports  
(in million US$) | Net trade  
(in million US$)  
---|---|---|---  
2023  | $7,220  | $17,243  | −$10,023   
2020  | $6,052  | $14,390  | −$8,338   
2015  | $5,970  | $14,349  | −$8,379   
2010  | $5,211  | $11,442  | −$6,231   
2005  | $3,459  | $5,587  | −$2,127   
2000  | $1,778  | $3,022  | −$1,243   
1990  | $1,090  | $2,005  | −$915   
1980  | $1,421  | $2,345  | −$923   
  
### Foreign investment policies

Kenyan policies on foreign investment generally have been favourable since
independence, with occasional tightening of restrictions to promote the
africanisation of enterprises. Foreign investors have been guaranteed
ownership and the right to remit dividends, royalties, and capital.

Kenya is currently the most important source of foreign direct investments in
Uganda and Rwanda. Uganda and its neighbouring regions are the main export
destinations for Kenyan products. Kenya has had more success in growing its
economy and quality of life levels than many of its neighbours in sub-Saharan
Africa.

## Industries

### Agriculture

Tea farm, Kericho County Flower production

Kenya produced in 2018:

  * 5.2 million tons of sugarcane;
  * 4 million tons of maize;
  * 1.8 million tons of potato;
  * 1.4 million tons of banana;
  * 946 thousand tons of cassava;
  * 871 thousand tons of sweet potato;
  * 775 thousand tons of mango (including mangosteen and guava);
  * 765 thousand tons of beans;
  * 599 thousand tons of tomato;
  * 674 thousand tons of cabbage;
  * 492 thousand tons of tea (3rd largest producer in the world, losing only to China and India);
  * 349 thousand tons of pineapple;
  * 336 thousand tons of wheat;
  * 239 thousand tons of carrot;
  * 233 thousand tons of avocado;
  * 206 thousand tons of sorghum;
  * 188 thousand tons of watermelon;
  * 179 thousand tons of cowpea;
  * 169 thousand tons of spinach;
  * 131 thousand tons of papaya;
  * 92 thousand tons of coconut;
  * and 41 thousand tons of coffee.

Agriculture is the second largest contributor to Kenya's GDP, after the
service sector, although only 15% of Kenya's total land area has sufficient
fertility and rainfall to be farmed, and only 7 or 8% can be classified as
first-class land. In 2006, almost 75% of working Kenyans made their living on
the land, compared with 80% in 1980. About half of total agricultural output
is non-marketed subsistence production.

In 2005, agriculture, including forestry and fishing, accounted for about 24%
of GDP, as well as for 18% of wage employment and 50% of revenue from exports.
That same year, horticulture accounted for 23% and tea for 22% of total export
earnings. The principal cash crops in Kenyan agriculture are tea,
horticultural produce, and coffee. Coffee has declined in importance with
depressed world prices, accounting for just 5% of export receipts in 2005. The
production of major food staples such as corn is subject to sharp weather-
related fluctuations. Production downturns also periodically necessitate food
aid. In 2004, aid was needed for 1.8 million people because of Kenya's
intermittent droughts. However, the expansion of credit to the agricultural
sector has enabled farmers to better deal with environmental and pricing
risks.

Tea, coffee, sisal, pyrethrum, corn, and wheat are grown in the fertile
highlands, one of the most successful agricultural production regions in
Africa. Livestock predominates in the semi-arid savanna to the north and east.
Coconuts, pineapples, cashew nuts, cotton, sugarcane, sisal, and corn are
grown in the lower-lying areas.

### Forestry and fishing

Resource degradation has reduced output from forestry. In 2004, roundwood
removals came to 22,162,000 cubic meters. Fisheries are of local importance
around Lake Victoria and have potential at Lake Turkana. Kenya's total catch
in 2004 was 128,000 metric tons. However, output from fishing has been
declining because of ecological disruption. Pollution, overfishing, and the
use of unauthorised fishing equipment have led to falling catches and have
endangered local fish species.

### Mining and minerals

Soda ash train, Lake Magadi, Kajiado County

Kenya has no significant mineral endowment. The mining and quarrying sector
makes a negligible contribution to the economy, accounting for less than 1% of
GDP. The majority of this is contributed by the soda ash operation at Lake
Magadi in south-central Kenya. Thanks largely to rising soda ash output,
Kenya's mineral production in 2005 reached more than 1 million tons. One of
Kenya's largest foreign-investment projects in recent years is the planned
expansion of Magadi Soda. Apart from soda ash, the chief minerals produced are
limestone, gold, salt, large quantities of niobium, fluorspar, and fossil
fuel.

All unextracted minerals are government property, under the Mining Act. The
Department of Mines and Geology, under the Ministry of Environment and Natural
Resources, controls exploration and exploitation of minerals.

### Industry and manufacturing

Although Kenya is the most industrially developed country in East Africa,
manufacturing still accounts for only 14% of GDP. This represents only a
slight increase since independence. The rapid expansion of the sector
immediately after independence stagnated in the 1980s, hampered by shortages
in hydroelectric power, high energy costs, dilapidated transport
infrastructure, and the dumping of cheap imports. However, due to
urbanisation, the industry and manufacturing sectors have become increasingly
important to the Kenyan economy, and this has been reflected by an increasing
GDP per capita. Industrial activity, concentrated around the three largest
urban centres, Nairobi, Mombasa, and Kisumu, is dominated by food-processing
industries such as grain milling, beer production, sugarcane crushing, and the
fabrication of consumer goods. Kenya also has an oil refinery that processes
imported crude petroleum into petroleum products, mainly for the domestic
market. In addition, a substantial and expanding informal sector engages in
small-scale manufacturing of household goods, motor-vehicle parts, and farm
implements.

Kenya's inclusion among the beneficiaries of the US Government's African
Growth and Opportunity Act gave a boost to manufacturing. Since the Act took
effect in 2000, Kenya's clothing sales to the United States increased from
US$44 million to US$270M in 2006. Other initiatives to strengthen
manufacturing include favourable tax measures, including the absence of duties
for capital equipment and other raw materials.

### Energy

The largest segment of Kenya's electricity supply comes from hydroelectric
stations at dams along the upper Tana River, as well as the Turkwel Gorge Dam
in the west. A petroleum-fired plant on the coast, geothermal facilities at
Olkaria, and electricity imported from Uganda make up the balance. Kenya's
installed capacity stood at 1,142 megawatts a year between 2001 and 2003. The
state-owned Kenya Electricity Generating Company, established in 1997 under
the name Kenya Power Company, handles the generation of electricity, while the
Kenya Power and Lighting Company handles transmission and distribution.
Shortfalls of electricity occur periodically when drought reduces water flow.
In 1997 and 2000, for example, drought prompted severe power rationing, with
economically-damaging 12-hour blackouts. Frequent outages and high costs of
power remain serious obstacles to economic activity. Tax and other concessions
are planned to encourage investment in hydroelectricity and in geothermal
energy, which Kenya has been a pioneer in adopting.

Kenya currently imports all crude petroleum requirements, with petroleum
accounting for 20% to 25% of the national import bill. Hydrocarbon reserves
have been found in Kenya's semi-arid northern region of Turkana after several
decades of intermittent exploration. Offshore prospecting also continues.
Kenya Petroleum Refineries, a 50:50 joint venture between the government and
several oil majors, operates the country's sole oil refinery in Mombasa. The
refinery's production is transported via Kenya's Mombasa–Nairobi pipeline.
However, the refinery is currently non-operational.[_when?_] In 2004, oil
consumption was estimated at 55,000 barrels (8,700 m3) a day.

Total energy consumption in Terrawatt-hours (TWh) of Kenya  1980  | 1990  | 2000  | 2010  | 2020  | 2021   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
29  | 36  | 46  | 67  | 99  | 104   
Per capita consumption in Kilowatt-hours (KWh)  
1,815  | 1,551  | 1,479  | 1,623  | 1,902  | 1,953   
  
### Tourism

Guided tours. WaterLovers Beach Resort, Diani Beach.

Kenya's dependence on tourism has greatly reduced over the years. Tourism,
both domestic and international, accounted for around 6% of Kenya’s economy in
2023. In 2019, foreign tourist revenues stood at $1.76 billion, accounting for
only 1.6% of Kenya's GDP and approximately 12% of all international tourism
receipts in Eastern Africa.

The growing middle class in Kenya has also led to a significant growth in
domestic tourism over the years. This steady growth in domestic tourism has
defied the turmoil of elections or terror attacks. In 2014, for the first
time, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics data showed that the number of
Kenyans accommodated in hotel rooms was higher than that of foreign tourists,
pointing to the increasing significance of domestic tourism and highlighting
the need for the government to focus on promoting domestic tourism over
international visitors as a way of yielding more sustainable growth in the
tourism sector

In 2018, domestic tourists’ bed occupancy accounted for 52.9% of the total bed
occupancy in the country.

Kenya offers numerous large national parks in a wide variety of landscapes.
Besides the coast, there are large deserts, steppes and mountains. The
national parks and nature reserves contain the natural habitats of many animal
species.

### Financial services

Kenya is East Africa's hub for financial services. The Nairobi Stock Exchange
(NSE) is ranked 4th in Africa in terms of market capitalisation.

The banking sector in Kenya is regulated by The Central Bank Of Kenya. Kenya's
banking sector is mainly dominated by local commercial banks, namely Equity
Bank, Kenya Commercial Bank, NCBA Bank, Diamond Trust Bank, Cooperative Bank,
and National Bank. The Kenya Commercial Bank is the largest bank in Kenya by
asset size and branch network as of 2023.

Kenya enjoys the presence of a number of high-profile accounting firms. The
Big Four firms, Mazars, Grant Thornton International, and PKF International
actively operate within the financial system, and are often responsible for
the audit of Nairobi Stock Exchange firms.

### Shipbuilding

Kenya’s first commercial-sized ship to be built from scratch—not only in Kenya
but also in the whole of East Africa—was launched in October 2023. The
1800-ton vessel, the MV Uhuru II, will ferry goods and petroleum across Lake
Victoria.

## Labour

In 2022, Kenya's labour force was estimated to include about 24 million
workers. In recent years, much of Kenya's labour force has moved from the
countryside to cities such as Nairobi, as Kenya becomes increasingly
urbanised.

The labour force participation rate in Kenya has been constant from 1997 to
2010 for both women and men. In 1997, 65% of women were employed in some type
of labour and 76% of men were employed. In 2005, 60% of women and 70% of men
were in the labour force, increasing slightly to 61% of women and 72% of men
in 2010.

In the past 20 years, many Kenyans have moved away from family farming towards
wage labour, small business entrepreneurship, and informal work. In 1989, 4.5
million Kenyans out of a total working population of 7.3M worked on family
farms. In 2009, only 6.5M Kenyans out of a total working population of 14.3M
worked on family farms. Of these, 3.8M were women and 2.7M were men.

According to the World Bank 2012 Kenya Economic Update, modern wage jobs
include being an "engineer, telecommunication specialist, cut flower worker,
teacher, construction worker, housekeepers, professionals, any industrial and
manufacturing job, and port and dock workers." In 1989, there were only 1.9M
Kenyans employed in wage work. In 2009, this number increased to 5.1M, with
3.4M men and 1.3M women were employed in wage jobs.

### Informal economy ("Jua Kali")

In Kenya, the "Jua Kali" sector is another name for the informal economy, also
described as non-farming self-employment. Jua Kali is Swahili for "hot sun"
and refers to the idea that the workers in the informal economy work under the
fierce sun. The informal sector consists of legally unrecognised and
unregulated self-employment and wage employment. As a result, informal sector
employment does not contribute to Kenya's GDP. Non-farm self-employment has
risen from 1989 to 2009.

The World Bank characterises non-farm self-employment to include jobs such as
"street vendor, shop owner, dressmaker, assistant, fishmonger, caterer, etc."
Non-farm self-employment has risen from a total of 0.9 million workers in 1989
to a total of 2.7 million in 2009. Men make up 1.4 million workers, and women
workers number 1.3 million.

As of 2009, Kenya's informal economy accounts for about 80% of the total
employment for the country. Most informal workers are self-employed, with few
entrepreneurs employing others. The informal sector contributes economic
activity equal to 35% of the total GDP in Kenya, and has its own informal
finance structure in the form of rotating savings and credit associations.
This sector provides an income mainly for those in lower socioeconomic groups.

Drawbacks of the informal economy include the promotion of smuggling and tax
evasion and the lack of social and legal protection. Most members of the
informal sector have low educational attainment. Rising costs of education and
uncertainty about future employment have caused many workers to enter the
informal economy, due to lower entry fees as well as shorter and practical
training and apprenticeships.

### Human capital

Kenya has one of the best human capital in Africa. According to the World
Bank's 2019 Human Capital Index (HCI), which measured human capital of the
next generation, Kenya ranked first in sub-Saharan Africa with an HCI score of
0.52. The index combined several key indicators, such as school enrolment,
child survival, quality of learning, healthy growth and adult survival into a
single index ranging between 0–1.

## Challenges

The economy's heavy dependence on rain for its agriculture leaves it
vulnerable to periods of high inflation during droughts. The agricultural
sector employs nearly 33% of the total labour force.

Kenya's economic performance had for a long time been hampered by various
factors: heavy dependence on a few agricultural exports vulnerable to global
price fluctuations; population growth which has outstripped economic growth;
prolonged droughts requiring power rationing; deteriorating infrastructure;
and extreme income inequality. Some of these issues have been addressed by
policies, with GDP growth increasing, population growth slowing, rapid
infrastructural improvements being made and increased electrification rates
with more stable power supplies.

Poor governance and corruption also have had a negative impact on growth,
making it expensive to do business in Kenya.

Despite these challenges, two thirds of Kenyans expect living conditions to
improve in the coming decades.