| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( June 2025)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy of Syria** , primarily based on agriculture in the country's
early years, deteriorated after the start of the Syrian civil war in March
2011.

## History

Since the establishment of the First Syrian Republic in 1946, the economy has
undergone many structural and other changes. Although the presence of the
Allied forces during World War II stimulated commerce by providing markets for
agriculture, textiles, and other locally manufactured goods, Syria lacked both
the infrastructure and the resources to achieve economic prosperity.
Agriculture, which had played a key role in the economy, became a factor in
industrial expansion as landowners channeled profits from agricultural exports
into agroindustrial and related urban enterprises. The population, working
under land tenure and sharecropping arrangements, derived few benefits from
the agriculturally induced economic growth of the 1950s. However, Syria's
union with Egypt (1958–61) and the rise of the Baath Party as the major
political force in the country in the 1960s, transformed Syria's economic
orientation and development strategy.

Historical development of real GDP per capita in Syria, since 1820

### 1960s–1970s: State-led development

By the mid-1960s, government-sponsored land reform and nationalization of
major industries and foreign investments had confirmed the new socialist
direction of Syria's economic policy. As the state assumed greater control
over economic decision-making by adopting centralized planning and strictly
regulating commercial transactions, Syria experienced a substantial loss of
skilled workers, administrators, and their capital. Despite the political
upheavals, which undermined the confidence of landowners, merchants, and
industrialists, the state successfully implemented large-scale development
projects to expand industry, agriculture, and infrastructure.

During the 1970s, Syria achieved high rates of economic growth. The dramatic
rise of world oil prices from 1973 to 1974 led to increased production from
domestic refineries. Moreover, higher prices for agricultural and oil exports,
as well as the state's limited economic liberalization policy, encouraged
growth. Also, Syria's economic boom was furthered by increased remittances
from Syrians working in the oil-rich Arab states and higher levels of Arab and
other foreign aid. By the end of the decade, the Syrian economy had shifted
from its traditional agrarian base to an economy dominated by the service,
industrial, and commercial sectors. Massive expenditures for development of
irrigation, electricity, water, road building projects, irisin plants and
expansion of health services and education to rural areas contributed to
prosperity. However, the economy remained dependent on foreign aid and grants
to finance the growing deficits both in the budget and in trade. Syria, as a
front-line state in the Arab-Israeli conflict, was also vulnerable to the
vagaries of Middle East politics, relying on Arab aid transfers and Soviet
assistance to support mounting defense expenditures.

### 1980s: Crisis and austerity

By the mid-1980s, the country's economic climate had shifted from prosperity
to austerity. Syria's economic boom collapsed as a result of the rapid fall of
world oil prices, lower export revenues, drought affecting agricultural
production, and falling worker remittances. Also, Arab aid levels decreased
because of economic retrenchment in the oil-producing states and Syrian
support for Iran in the Iran-Iraq War. Real per capita GDP fell 22% between
1982 and 1989. To restore the economy, the government sharply reduced
spending, cut back imports, encouraged more private sector and foreign
investment, and launched an anticorruption campaign against smugglers and
black-market money changers. However, massive defense outlays continued to
divert resources from productive investments.

By the late 1980s, spot shortages of basic commodities occurred frequently,
and industry operated far below capacity because of routine power outages.
Foreign exchange reserves plummeted, the trade deficit widened, and real gross
domestic product growth fell as economic difficulties compounded. Although the
government instituted limited reforms to respond to the burgeoning crisis,
Syria's pressing economic problems required a radically restructured economic
policy to improve future economic performance.

### 1990s–2000s: Liberalization and privatization

In 1990, the Assad government instituted a series of economic reforms,
although the economy remained highly regulated. The Syrian economy experienced
strong growth throughout the 1990s, and into the 2000s. Syria's per capita GDP
was US$4,058 in 2010. There is no authoritative GDP data available after 2012,
due to Syria's civil war.

Following his assumption of power in 2000, Bashar al-Assad sought to frame his
leadership around modernizing and opening the economy. He emphasized, in
particular, "the need to modernize the regulatory environment and the
industrial base, activate and encourage the private sector, remove
bureaucratic obstacles to investment, increase job opportunities, qualify
cadres, improve education and expand information technology." While the
government's neoliberal reforms indeed contributed to ramping up trade and
invigorating the private sector, these were accompanied by rising inequality,
declining public services, and increasingly overt forms of corruption, which
ultimately helped fuel protests in 2011. In one example of this trend, the
Syrian Agricultural Workers Union complained in February 2011 that state
mismanagement and the lifting of input subsidies was exacerbating the impact
of drought on Syria's agricultural sector.

Before the civil war, the two main pillars of the Syrian economy were
agriculture and oil, which together accounted for about one-half of GDP.
Agriculture, for instance, accounted for about 26% of GDP and employed 25% of
the total labor force. However, poor climatic conditions and severe drought
badly affected the agricultural sector, reducing its share in the economy to
about 17% of 2008 GDP, down from 20.4% in 2007, according to preliminary data
from the Central Bureau of Statistics. On the other hand, higher crude oil
prices countered declining oil production and led to higher budgetary and
export receipts.

### 2011–present: Syria's civil war

Since the outbreak of the Syrian Civil War, the Syrian economy has been
affected by economic sanctions restricting trade with the Arab League,
Australia, Canada, the European Union, (as well as the European countries of
Albania, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Norway,
Serbia, and Switzerland), Georgia, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Turkey, and the
United States. Sanctions against Syria were further extended by the US Caesar
Syria Civilian Protection Act that came into force in June 2020.

The destruction and dislocation associated with the civil war have devastated
Syria's economy. By the end of 2013, the UN estimated total economic damage
from the Syrian Civil War at $143 billion. In 2018, the World Bank estimated
that about one-third of Syria's housing stock and one half of its health and
education facilities have been destroyed by the conflict. According to the
World Bank, a cumulative total of $226 billion in GDP was lost due to the
conflict from 2011 to 2016.

The Syrian economy suffered from conflict-related hyperinflation. The Syrian
annual inflation rate is one of the highest in the world. The national
currency, the Syrian pound, tumbled in mid-2020 against the US dollar,
therefore stating that Syrian economy was only taking a turn for the worst.
The pound, which traded at LS 47 to the dollar before the 2011 uprising,
plunged to over LS 3,000 to the dollar. Prices of basic goods have skyrocketed
and some staples have disappeared from the market as merchants and the public
struggled to keep up with the rising cost of living.

In 2022, Syria joined the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative, which could help
the country rebuild its war-torn infrastructure and economy. Following the end
of Bashar Al-asad regime and the civil war, the interim government appointed
for the first time in history a woman as governor of the central bank. Maysaa
Sabreen was announced as the new governor on December 30, 2024. 20 days before
on the 10 December Basel Abdul Hannan became Minister of the Economy, In his
new role, he announced plans to implement market liberalization reforms,
including dismantling the existing import-export control system and moving
toward a free-market economic model. During a meeting with the Damascus
Chambers of Commerce, he outlined plans to remove restrictions on imports and
allow registered businesses to trade more freely.

## Basic information

| This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. _( April 2016)__(Learn how
and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
During the 1960s, along socialist lines, the government nationalized most
major enterprises and adopted economic policies designed to address regional
and class disparities. Economic reform has been incremental and gradual. In
2001, private banking in Syria has been legalized. In 2004, four private banks
began operations. In August 2004, a committee was formed to supervise the
establishment of a stock market. Beyond the financial sector, the Syrian
Government has enacted major changes to rental and tax laws, and is reportedly
considering similar changes to the commercial code and to other laws, which
impact property rights.[_citation needed_]

Syria produced heavy-grade oil from fields inside in the northeast since the
late 1960s. In the early 1980s, light-grade, low-sulphur oil was discovered
near Deir ez-Zor in eastern Syria. This discovery relieved Syria of the need
to import light oil to mix with domestic heavy crude in refineries. As the war
erupted in 2011, Syria's oil production had dropped to 353,000 bpd and then
plunged to 24,000 bpd by 2018. Syria's oil reserves have been gradually
depleted and reached an estimated 2.5 billion barrels of oil reserves in 2018.

In 1990, the government established an official parallel exchange rate to
provide incentives for remittances and exports through official channels. This
action improved the supply of basic commodities and contained inflation by
removing risk premiums on smuggled commodities.

Foreign aid to Syria in 1997 totaled an estimated US$199 million. The World
Bank reported that in July 2004, it had committed a total of US$661 million
for 20 operations in Syria. One investment project remained active at that
time.

Year | Gross Domestic Product | US Dollar Exchange | Inflation Index  
(2000=100) | Per Capita Income  
(as % of USA) | Population   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980 | 78,270 | £S 3.94 | 8.10 | 12.17 | 8,971,343   
1985 | 146,225 | £S 3.92 | 14 | 11.64 | 10,815,289   
1990 | 268,328 | £S 28.80 | 57 | 4.37 | 12,720,920   
1995 | 570,975 | £S 35.30 | 98 | 4.18 | 14,610,348   
2000 | 903,944 | £S 49.68 | 100 | 3.49 | 16,510,861   
2005 | 1,677,417 | £S 56.09 | 122 | 3.70 | 19,121,454   
2010 | 59,633,000 | £S 47.00 | 4.40% | 5.79 | 21,092,262   
  
## External trade and investment

Syrian exports in 2006

Despite the mitigation of the severe drought that plagued the region in the
late 1990s and the recovery of energy export revenues, Syria's economy has
historically faced serious challenges.

Commerce has always been important to the Syrian economy, which benefited from
the country's strategic location along major east–west trade routes. Syrian
cities boast both traditional industries such as weaving and dried-fruit
packing and modern heavy industry. Given the policies adopted from the 1960s
through the late 1980s, Syria refused to join the "global economy". In late
2001, however, Syria submitted a request to the World Trade Organization (WTO)
to begin the accession process. Syria had been an original contracting party
of the former General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade but withdrew in 1951
because of Israel's joining. Major elements of current Syrian trade rules
would have to change in order to be consistent with the WTO. In March 2007,
Syria signed an Association Agreement with the European Union that would
encourage both sides to negotiate a free trade agreement before 2010.

The bulk of Syrian imports have been raw materials essential for industry,
agriculture, equipment, and machinery. Major exports include crude oil,
refined products, raw cotton, clothing, fruits, and cereal grains.

Over time, the government has increased the number of transactions to which
the more favorable neighboring country exchange rate applies. The government
also introduced a quasi-rate for non-commercial transactions in 2001 broadly
in line with prevailing black market rates.

Given the poor development of its own capital markets and Syria's lack of
access to international money and capital markets, monetary policy remains
captive to the need to cover the fiscal deficit. Although in 2003 Syria
lowered interest rates for the first time in 22 years and again in 2004, rates
remain fixed by law.

As of 2012[update], because of the ongoing Syrian civil war, the value of
Syria's overall exports has been slashed by two-thirds, from the figure of
US$12 billion in 2010 to only US$4 billion in 2012. Syria's GDP declined by
over 3% in 2011.

### Debt

Under Syrian President Bashar Assad, national debt in relation to GDP went
from 152.09% in 2000 down to 30.02% in 2010. Prior to the civil war, Syria
attempted to ease its heavy foreign debt burden through bilateral rescheduling
deals with virtually all of its key creditors in Europe, including Germany,
France, and Russia. In December 2004, Syria and Poland reached an agreement by
which Syria would pay $27 million out of the total $261.7 million debt. In
January 2005, Russia and Syria signed a deal that wrote off nearly 75% of
Syria's debt to Russia, approximately $13 billion. The agreement left Syria
with less than €3 billion (just over $3.6 billion) owed to Moscow. Half of it
would be repaid over the next 10 years, while the rest would be paid into
Russian accounts in Syrian banks and could be used for Russian investment
projects in Syria and for buying Syrian products. Later that year, Syria
reached an agreement with Slovakia and the Czech Republic to settle an
estimated $1.6 billion in debt, in exchange for a one time payment of $150
million.

## Sectors of the economy

### Agriculture

Olive groves in Western-Syria, Homs Governorate.

Agriculture is a high priority in Syria's economic development plans, as the government seeks to achieve food self-sufficiency, increase export earnings, and halt rural out-migration. Thanks to sustained capital investment, infrastructure development, subsidies of inputs, and price supports, before the civil war Syria went from a net importer of many agricultural products to an exporter of cotton, fruits, vegetables, and other foodstuffs. One of the prime reasons for this turnaround was the government's investment in huge irrigation systems in northern and northeastern Syria. The agriculture sector, as of 2009, employed about 17% of the labor force and generates about 21% .org/ddp/home.do?Step=2&id=4&DisplayAggregation=N&SdmxSupported=Y&CNO=2&SET_BRANDING=YES The World Bank DataBank | Explore . Create . Share]. Databank.worldbank.org.</ref> of which livestock accounted for 16%, and fruit and grains for more than 40%. 

In 2015, Syria's main exports included spice seeds ($83.2 million), apples and
pears ($53.2 million).

Most land is privately owned, a crucial factor behind the sector's success. Of
Syria's 196,000 km2 (76,000 sq mi), about 28% of it is cultivated, and 21% of
that total is irrigated. Most irrigated land is designated "strategic",
meaning that it encounters significant state intervention in terms of pricing,
subsidies, and marketing controls. "Strategic" products such as wheat, barley,
and sugar beets, must be sold to state marketing boards at fixed prices, often
above world prices in order to support farmers, but at a significant cost to
the state budget. The most widely grown arable crop is wheat, but the most
important cash crop is cotton; cotton was the largest single export before the
development of the oil sector. Nevertheless, the total area planted with
cotton has declined because of an increasing problem of water shortage coupled
with old and inefficient irrigation techniques. The output of grains like
wheat is often underutilized because of poor storage facilities.

Water and energy are among the most pervasive issues facing the agriculture
sector. Another difficulty suffered by the agricultural sector is the
government's decision to liberalize prices of fertilizers, which increased
between 100% and 400%.[_when?_] Drought was an alarming problem in 2008;
however, the drought situation slightly improved in 2009. Wheat and barley
production about doubled in 2009 compared to 2008. In spite of that, the
livelihoods of up to 1 million agricultural workers have been threatened. In
response, the UN launched an emergency appeal for $20.2 million. Wheat has
been one of the crops most affected, and for the first time in 2 decades Syria
has moved from being a net exporter of wheat to a net importer. During the
civil war which began in 2011, the Syrian government was forced to put out a
tender for 100,000 metric tonnes of wheat, one of the few trade products not
subject to economic sanctions.

Less than 2.7% of Syria's land area is forested, and only a portion of that is
commercially useful. Limited forestry activity is centered in the higher
elevations of the mountains just inland from the coast, where rainfall is more
abundant.

### Drug exports

As of 2022, captagon was Ba'athist Syria's most valuable export product and a
key source of income for the Assad regime. The total value of drug shipments
sold in 2021 were approximately $5.7 billion. Those were mostly dismantled by
the new Syrian caretaker government in January 2025.

### Energy and mineral resources

#### Mining

Phosphates are the major minerals exploited in Syria. According to estimates
Syria has around 1,700 million tons of phosphate reserves. Production dropped
sharply in the early 1990s when world demand and prices fell, but output has
since increased to more than 2.4 million tons. Syria produced about 1.9% of
the world's phosphate rock output and was the world's ninth ranked producer of
phosphate rock in 2009. Other major minerals produced in Syria include cement,
gypsum, industrial sand (silica), marble, natural crude asphalt, nitrogen
fertilizer, phosphate fertilizer, salt, steel, and volcanic tuff, which
generally are not produced for export.

#### Oil and natural gas

Syria is a relatively small oil producer, accounting for just 0.5% of global
production in 2010. Although Syria is not a major oil exporter by Middle
Eastern standards, oil is a major pillar of the economy. According to the
International Monetary Fund, oil sales for 2010 were projected to generate
$3.2 billion for the Syrian government and account for 25.1% of the state's
revenue.

According to the 2009 Syria Report of the Oxford Business Group, the oil
sector accounted for 23% of government revenues, 20% of exports and 22% of GDP
in 2008. Syria exported roughly 150,000 bpd in 2008, and oil accounted for a
majority of the country's export income.

#### Electrical generation

In 2001 Syria reportedly produced 23.3 billion kilowatt hours (kWh) of
electricity and consumed 21.6 billion kWh. As of January 2002, Syria's total
installed electric generating capacity was 7.6 gigawatts (GW), with fuel oil
and natural gas serving as the primary energy sources and 1.5 GW generated by
hydroelectric power. A network totaling 45 GW linking the electric power grids
of Syria, Egypt, and Jordan was completed in March 2001. Syria's electric
supply capacity is an important national priority, and the government hopes to
add 3,000 megawatts of power generating capacity by 2010 at a probable cost of
US$2 billion, but progress has been slowed by a lack of investment
capital.[_needs update_] Power plants in Syria are undergoing intensive
maintenance, and four new generating plants have been built. The power
distribution network has serious problems, with transmission losses estimated
as high as 25 percent of total generated capacity as a result of poor quality
wires and transformer stations. A project for the expansion and upgrading of
the power transmission network is scheduled for completion in 2005.[_needs
update_]

As of May 2009 it was reported that the Islamic Development Bank and the
Syrian government signed an agreement stating that the bank would provide a
€100 million loan for the expansion of Deir Ali power station in Syria.

#### Nuclear energy

Syria abandoned its plans to build a VVER-440 reactor after the Chernobyl
accident. The plans for a nuclear program were revived at the beginning of the
2000s when Syria negotiated with Russia to build a nuclear facility that would
include a nuclear power plant and a seawater atomic desalination plant.

### Industry and manufacturing

The industrial sector, which includes mining, manufacturing, construction, and
petroleum, accounted for 27.3 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2010
and employed about 16 percent of the labor force. The main industrial products
are petroleum, textiles, food processing, beverages, tobacco, phosphate rock
mining, cement, oil seeds crushing, and car assembly. Syria's manufacturing
sector was largely state dominated until the 1990s, when economic reforms
allowed greater local and foreign private-sector participation. Private
participation remains constrained, however, by the lack of investment funds,
input/output pricing limits, cumbersome customs and foreign exchange
regulations, and poor marketing.

Because land prices are not controlled by the state, real estate is one of the
few domestic avenues for investment with realistic and safe returns. Activity
in the construction sector tends to mirror changes in the economy. Investment
Law No. 10 of 1991, which opened the country to foreign investment in some
areas, marked the beginning of a strong revival, with growth in real terms
increasing over 2001 and 2002.

### Services

Services accounted for 60.4% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017 and
employed 67% of the labor force, including government, in 2008. In May 2009,
it was reported that Damascus office prices were skyrocketing.

#### Banking and finance

Bank Al-Sharq and the Blue Tower Hotel in Damascus

The Central Bank of Syria began operations in 1959. It controls all foreign
exchange and trade transactions and gives priority to lending to the public
sector. The Central Bank has been subject to US sanctions since May 2004,
which has accused the Bank of money laundering. These US sanctions may have
increased the role of Lebanese and European banks because a ban on
transactions between U.S. financial institutions and the Central Bank of Syria
created an increase in demand for intermediary sources for US$
transfers.[_needs update_] The United States, European Union, Arab League and
Turkey all also imposed sanctions on the Central Bank because of the Civil
War.

The six specialized state-owned banks – the Central Bank of Syria, Commercial
Bank of Syria, Agricultural Co-Operative Bank, Industrial Bank, Popular Credit
Bank, and Real Estate Bank – are major financial operators. They each extend
funds to, and take deposits from, a particular sector. The Industrial Bank
also is directed more toward the public sector, although it is under-
capitalized. As a result, the private sector often is forced to bank abroad, a
process that is more expensive and therefore a poor solution to industrial
financing needs. Many business people travel abroad to deposit or borrow
funds. It is estimated that Syrians have deposited US$6 billion in Lebanese
banks.

In the 2000s, Syria started reforms in the financial sector, including the
introduction of private banks and the opening of the Damascus Securities
Exchange in March 2009. In 2001, Syria legalized private banks and the sector,
while still nascent, has been growing. Foreign banks were given licenses in
December 2002, under Law 28 March 2001 which allows the establishment of
private and joint-venture banks. Foreigners are allowed up to 49% ownership of
a bank, but may not hold a controlling stake. As of January 2010, 13 private
banks had opened, including two Islamic banks.

Syria took gradual steps to loosen controls over foreign exchange. In 2003,
the government canceled a law that criminalized private sector use of foreign
currencies, and in 2005 it allowed licensed private banks to sell specific
amounts of foreign currency to Syrian citizens under certain circumstances and
to the private sector to finance imports. In October 2009, Syria further
loosened its restrictions on currency transfers by allowing Syrians travelling
abroad to withdraw the equivalent of up to US$10,000 from their Syrian pound
accounts. In practice, the decision allows local banks to open accounts of a
maximum of US$10,000 that their clients can use for their international
payment cards. The holders of these accounts will be able to withdraw up to
US$10,000 per month while travelling abroad.

To attract investment and to ease access to credit, the government allowed
investors in 2007 to receive loans and other credit instruments from foreign
banks, and to repay the loans and any accrued interest through local banks
using project proceeds. In February 2008, the government permitted investors
to receive loans in foreign currencies from local private banks to finance
capital investments. Syria's exchange rate is fixed, and the government
maintains two official rates—one rate on which the budget and the value of
imports, customs, and other official transactions are based, and a second set
by the Central Bank on a daily basis that covers all other financial
transactions. The government passed a law in 2006 which permits the operation
of private money exchange companies. However, there is still a small black
market for foreign currency.

Since the start of the Syrian Civil War in 2011, there has been a capital
flight to nearby countries. Syria has been subject to sanctions by United
States, Canada, European Union, Arab League and Turkey because of the civil
war. The currency of Syria is the Syrian pound (SYP). The pound's official
exchange rate has deteriorated significantly, falling from £S 47 for US$1
before the civil war to £S 1,256 as in June 2020. On another hand, while its
exchange rate for money transfer is £S 1,250 for US$1, its non-official
exchange rate (black market) plunged to around £S 4,000 for US$1 in March
2021.

#### Tourism

Tourism in Syria has greatly reduced as a result of the Syrian Civil War and
its associated refugee crisis. Tourism has been further impacted by the
outbreak of COVID-19 that started in March 2020. The international economic
sanctions imposed on Syria and the sharp drop in the value of the Syrian pound
also adversely impact tourism in Syria.

## Labour

Syria has a population of approximately 21 million people, and Syrian
government figures place the population growth rate at 2.37%, with 65% of the
population under the age of 35 and more than 40% under the age of 15. Each
year more than 200,000 new job seekers enter the Syrian job market, but the
economy has not been able to absorb them. In 2017, the Syrian labor force was
estimated to total about 3.767 million people. An estimated 67 percent worked
in the services sector including government, 17 percent in agriculture, and 16
percent in industry in 2008. Government and public sector employees constitute
about 30% of the total labor force and are paid very low salaries and wages.

According to Syrian Government statistics, the unemployment rate in 2009 was
12.6%; however, more accurate independent sources place it closer to 20%.
About 70 percent of Syria's workforce earns less than US$100 per month.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that many more Syrians are seeking work over the
border in Lebanon than official numbers indicate. In 2002 the Unemployment
Commission (UC) was established, tasked with creating several hundred thousand
jobs over a five-year period. As of June 2009 it was reported that some
700,000 households in Syria – about 3.5 million people – have no income.
Government officials acknowledge that the economy is not growing at a pace
sufficient to create enough new jobs annually to match population growth. The
UN Development Programme (UNDP) announced in 2005 that 30% of the Syrian
population lives in poverty and 11.4% live below the subsistence level.

The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour is responsible.

## Opportunity cost of conflict

A report by Strategic Foresight Group, an India-based think tank, calculated
the opportunity cost of conflict for the Middle East for 1991–2010 at US$12
trillion in 2006 dollars. Syria's share in this was US$152 billion, more than
four times the projected 2010 GDP of US$36 billion.

The Syrian Center for Policy Research stated in March 2015 that, by then,
nearly three million Syrians had lost their jobs because of the civil war,
causing the loss of the primary source of income of more than 12 million
people; unemployment levels "surged" from 14.9 percent in 2011 to 57.7 percent
at the end of 2014. As a result, 4 in 5 Syrians were by then living in
poverty, with 30 percent of the population living in "abject poverty" and
frequently unable to meet basic household food needs. An estimate from 2023
estimated the population below the poverty threshold in Syria to be 90%.