The **economy of the Gambia** is heavily reliant on agriculture. The Gambia
has a mixed economy with a heavy reliance on agriculture, combined with
relatively weak centralized economic planning and government regulation.
Before 2017 the Gambia had a under Yahya Jammeh liberal, market-based economy
characterised by traditional subsistence agriculture, a historic reliance on
groundnuts (peanuts) for export earnings, a re-export trade built up around
its ocean port, low import duties, minimal administrative procedures, a
fluctuating exchange rate with no exchange controls, and a significant tourism
industry. The Gambia also has no significant mineral or other natural
resources, and has a limited agricultural base. About 75% of the population
depends on crops and livestock for its livelihood. Small-scale manufacturing
activity features the processing of peanuts, fish, and animal hides.

Short-run economic progress remains highly dependent on foreign aid, and on
responsible government economic management as forwarded by International
Monetary Fund technical help and advice.

## Economic history

Current GDP per capita Archived 2012-05-04 at the Wayback Machine of the
Gambia registered a peak growth of 23.3% in the 1970s. Economic growth slowed
by 8.30% in the 1980s and a further 5.20% in the 1990s.

Re-export trade normally constitutes a major segment of economic activity, but
the 50% devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994 made Senegalese goods
more competitive and hurt the re-export trade. The Gambia has benefited from a
rebound in tourism after its decline in response to the military's takeover in
July 1994. Lately, Indian global health expert Dr Edmond Fernandes stated that
Gambia presents a global investment opportunity and dissected various areas of
business interests.

## Macro-economic trend

This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Gambia at market prices
estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of
Dalasi (currency used in Gambia).

Year | Gross Domestic Product | US dollar exchange | Inflation index (2000=100)   
---|---|---|---  
1980 | 435 | 1.71 Dalasi | 13   
1985 | 782 | 4.09 Dalasi | 25   
1990 | 2,367 | 8.13 Dalasi | 65   
1995 | 3,617 | 9.49 Dalasi | 90   
2000 | 5,382 | 12.78 Dalasi | 100   
2005 | 13,174 | 28.70 Dalasi | 158   
  
For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US dollar is exchanged at 4.35
Dalasi only.

The Gambia's economy is characterized by traditional subsistence agriculture,
a historic reliance on peanuts or groundnuts for export earnings, a re-export
trade built up around its ocean port, low import duties, minimal
administrative procedures, a fluctuating exchange rate with no exchange
controls, and a significant tourism industry. Average wages in 2007 hover
around $1–2 per day.

## Economic sectors

### Agriculture

Agriculture accounts for 23% of gross domestic product (GDP) and employs 75%
of the labor force. Within agriculture, peanut production accounts for 5.3% of
GDP, other crops 8.3%, livestock 4.4%, fishing 1.8%, and forestry 0.5%.

### Industry

Industry accounts for 12% of GDP. Manufacturing accounts for 6% of GDP. The
limited amount of manufacturing is primarily agriculturally based (e.g.,
peanut processing, bakeries, a brewery, and a tannery). Other manufacturing
activities include soap, soft drinks, and clothing. Services account for 19%
of GDP.

### Tourism

Tourism in Gambia has three major strands. There is the traditional sun
seeking holiday making use of the hot climate and wonderful beaches. The
Gambia is also usually the first African destination for many European
birders, due to its easily accessed and spectacular avian fauna. There are
also a significant number of African Americans tracing their roots in this
country, from which many Africans were taken during the slave trade. While not
that many American slaves came from Gambia it was made popular by Alex Haleys
historic novel and TV miniseries Roots: The Saga of an American Family

The tourist season is the dry season, during the Northern Hemisphere winter.

## Trade

In 2020 The Gambia's major export markets were Senegal, Mali, Guinea-Bissau,
India and China, accounting for 84% of all exports. Neighboring Senegal
accounted for 50.5% of exports. This contrasted with 1999 when the UK and
other EU countries were The Gambia's major domestic export markets, accounting
for 86% of all exports.

In 2020 Norway, China, Cote d'Ivoire, Brazil and Turkey were the major sources
of imports, accounting for 49% of the total. This contrasted with 1999 when
the UK and other EU countries were the major sources of imports, accounting
for 60% of all imports.

## Statistics

| This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section
by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged
and removed. _( January 2017)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
**GDP:**

    _purchasing power parity_ $2.264 billion (2008 est.)
    _real growth rate:_ 5.5% (2019 est.)
    _per capita:_ purchasing power parity - $1,300 (2008 est.)
    _composition by sector:_

    _agriculture:_ 33%
    _industry:_ 8.7%
    _services:_ 58.3% (2008 est.)

**Inflation rate (consumer prices):** 6.5% (2019 est.)

**Labor force:** 400,000

**Labor force - by occupation:** agriculture 75%, industry, commerce, and
services 19%, government 6%

**Budget:**

    _revenues:_ $88.6 million
    _expenditures:_ $98.2 million, including capital expenditures of $ (Not Available) (FY96/97 est.)

**Industries:** processing peanuts, fish, and hides; tourism; beverages;
agricultural machinery assembly, woodworking, metalworking; clothing

**Electricity**

    _production:_ 75 GWh, entirely from fossil fuels (1998)
    _consumption:_ 70 GWh (1998)
    _Electricity is not imported or exported from the Gambia._

**Agriculture - products:** peanuts, pearl millet, sorghum, rice, maize,
cassava (tapioca), palm kernels; cattle, sheep, goats; forest and fishery
resources not fully exploited.

**Exports:** $132 million (f.o.b., 1998)

    _commodities:_ peanuts and peanut products, fish, cotton lint, palm kernels.
    _partners:_ Benelux 78%, Japan, United Kingdom, Hong Kong, France, Spain (1997)

**Imports:** $201 million (f.o.b., 1998)

    _commodities:_ foodstuffs, manufactures, fuel, machinery and transport equipment.
    _partners:_ Hong Kong, United Kingdom, Netherlands, Ivory Coast, France, Senegal, Belgium (1997)

**Debt - external:** $430 million (1997 est.)

**Economic aid - recipient:** $45.400 million (1995)

**Currency:** Dalasi (D)

**Exchange rates:** dalasi (D) per US$1 – 43.860 (January 2017), 11.626
(November 1999), 10.643 (1998), 10.200 (1997), 9.789 (1996), 9.546 (1995)

**Fiscal year:** 1 July - 30 June