Part of a series on the  
---  
History of Cambodia  
Early history  
  
  * Funan
  * Chenla
  * Khmer Empire
    * Angkor
    * Khmer–Cham wars
    * Đại Việt–Khmer War

  
Post-Angkor period  
  
  * Chaktomuk era
  * Longvek era
  * Siamese-Cambodian War
  * Cambodian–Spanish War
  * Cambodian–Dutch War
  * Siamese annexation
  * Oudong era
  * Loss of Mekong Delta
  * Dai Viet invasion

  
Colonial period  
  
  * French protectorate
    * French Indochina
  * Japanese occupation (Cambodia in 1945)

  
Independence and conflict  
  
  * Post-independence
    * US bombing
    * Sihanouk Trail
    * Cambodian campaign
    * 1970 coup

  * Khmer Republic
    * US bombing
  * Cambodian Civil War
    * Fall of Phnom Penh

  * Democratic Kampuchea
    * _Mayaguez_ incident
    * Cambodian genocide
  * Cambodian–Vietnamese War
  * People's Republic of Kampuchea
    * exiled coalition government
    * K5 Plan

  
Peace process  
  
  * Cambodian Conflict (1979–1998)
  * 1991 Paris Peace Agreements
  * United Nations Administration (UNTAC) (1992-1993)
  * 1993 election
  * Khmer Rouge PGNUNSC

  
Modern Cambodia  
  
  * Economy
  * 1997 coup
  * Khmer Rouge Tribunal
  * 2003 Phnom Penh riots
  * Cambodian–Thai border dispute
  * 2013–2014 protests
  * COVID-19 pandemic

  
By topic  
  
  * Buddhism
  * Economic history
  * Humanitarian crisis
  * Military history
  * Monarchy
  * Names

  
  
  * **Timeline**

  
Cambodia portal  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
Cambodia's economy that currently follows an open market system (market
economy) and has seen rapid economic progress in the last decade. Cambodia had
a gross domestic product (GDP) of $28.54 billion in 2022. Per capita income,
although rapidly increasing, is low compared with most neighboring countries.
Cambodia's two largest industries are textiles and tourism, while agricultural
activities remain the main source of income for many Cambodians living in
rural areas. The service sector is heavily concentrated on trading activities
and catering-related services. Recently, Cambodia has reported that oil and
natural gas reserves have been found offshore. In recent years, illicit
economic activities like cyber scam center operations have become an
increasingly prominent of Cambodia's economy, representing as much as 40% of
Cambodia's official GDP in 2024.

In 1995, with a GDP of $2.92 billion the Cambodian government transformed the
country's economic system from a planned economy to its present market-driven
system. Following those changes, growth was estimated at a value of 7% while
inflation dropped from 26% in 1994 to only 6% in 1995. Imports increased due
to the influx of foreign aid, and exports, particularly from the country's
garment industry, also increased. Cambodia's economic growth translated to
about 0.71% for the ASEAN economy in 2016.

After four years of improving economic performance, Cambodia's economy slowed
in 1997–1998 due to the 1997 Asian financial crisis, civil unrest, and
political infighting. Foreign investments declined during this period. Also,
in 1998 the main harvest was hit by drought. But in 1999, the first full year
of relative peace in 30 years, progress was made on economic reforms and
growth resumed at 4%.

Currently, Cambodia's foreign policy focuses on establishing friendly borders
with its neighbors (such as Thailand and Vietnam), as well as integrating
itself into regional (ASEAN) and global (WTO) trading systems. Some of the
obstacles faced by this emerging economy are the need for a better education
system and the lack of a skilled workforce; particularly in the poverty-ridden
countryside, which struggles with inadequate basic infrastructure.
Nonetheless, Cambodia continues to attract investors because of its low wages,
plentiful labor, proximity to Asian raw materials, and favorable tax
treatment.

## Recent economic history

Following its independence from France in 1953, the Cambodian state has
undergone five periods of political, social, and economic transformation:

  1. First Kingdom of Cambodia (1953–1970)
  2. Khmer Republic (1970–1975)
  3. Democratic Kampuchea (1975–1982, ousted in 1979); became Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea in exile (1982–1993)
  4. People's Republic of Kampuchea (1979–1989), later renamed "State of Cambodia" (1989–1993)
  5. Second Kingdom of Cambodia (1993–present)

In 1989, the State of Cambodia implemented reform policies that transformed
the Cambodian economic system from a command economy to an open market one. In
line with the economic reformation, private property rights were introduced
and state-owned enterprises were privatized. Cambodia also focused on
integrating itself into regional and international economic blocs, such as the
Association of South East Asian Nations and the World Trade Organization
respectively. These policies triggered a growth in the economy, with its
national GDP growing at an average of 6.1% before a period of domestic unrest
and regional economic instability in 1997 (1997 Asian financial crisis).
However, conditions improved and since 1999, the Cambodian economy has
continued to grow at an average pace of approximately 6–8% per annum.

In 2007, Cambodia's gross domestic product grew by an estimated 18.6%. Garment
exports rose by almost 8%, while tourist arrivals increased by nearly 35%.
With exports decreasing, the 2007 GDP growth was driven largely by consumption
and investment. Foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows reached US$600 million
(7 percent of GDP), slightly more than what the country received in official
aid. Domestic investment, driven largely by the private sector, accounted for
23.4 percent of GDP. Export growth, especially to the US, began to slow in
late 2007 accompanied by stiffer competition from Vietnam and emerging risks
(a slowdown in the US economy and lifting of safeguards on China's exports).
US companies were the fifth largest investors in Cambodia, with more than $1.2
billion in investments over the period 1997–2007.

Cambodia was severely damaged economically by the 2008 financial crisis, and
its main economic sector, the garment industry, suffered a 23% drop in exports
to the United States and Europe. As a result, 60,000 workers were laid off.
However, in the last quarter of 2009 and early 2010, conditions were beginning
to improve and the Cambodian economy began to recover. Cambodian exports to
the US for the first 11 months of 2012 reached $2.49 billion, a 1 per cent
increase year-on-year. Its imports of US goods grew 26 per cent for that
period, reaching $213 million. Another factor underscoring the potential of
the Cambodian economy is the recent halving of its poverty rate. The poverty
rate is 20.5 per cent, meaning that approximately 2.8 million people live
below the poverty line.

Real GPD per capita development of Cambodia

## Data

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1986–2020 (with IMF
staff estimates in 2021–2026). Inflation below 5% is in green. The annual
unemployment rate is extracted from the World Bank, although the International
Monetary Fund find them unreliable.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$nominal) | GDP per capita (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1986  | n/a  | n/a  | 0.2  | 25.71  | n/a  | n/a  | n/a  | n/a   
1987  | 4.3  | 516.02  | 0.1  | 17.1  | n/a  | -31.2%  | n/a  | n/a   
1988  | 4.8  | 569.1  | 0.3  | 32.6  | 9.6%  | 23.0%  | n/a  | n/a   
1989  | 5.2  | 593.1  | 0.3  | 39.7  | 3.3%  | 63.8%  | n/a  | n/a   
1990  | 5.4  | 602.5  | 0.9  | 99.8  | 1.1%  | 141.8%  | n/a  | n/a   
1991  | 6.0  | 647.5  | 2.0  | 215.7  | 7.6%  | 191.0%  | 0.7%  | n/a   
1992  | 6.6  | 684.4  | 2.4  | 252.5  | 7.1%  | 75.0%  | 0.8%  | n/a   
1993  | 7.0  | 703.6  | 2.4  | 242.5  | 4.0%  | 114.3%  | 0.8%  | n/a   
1994  | 7.8  | 745.9  | 2.8  | 265.1  | 8.2%  | 10.4%  | 1.3%  | n/a   
1995  | 8.4  | 781.7  | 3.4  | 319.5  | 6.0%  | 10.1%  | 0.8%  | n/a   
1996  | 9.1  | 818.5  | 3.5  | 316.2  | 5.9%  | 7.1%  | 0.8%  | 30.2%   
1997  | 9.6  | 842.8  | 3.4  | 302.2  | 4.0%  | 10.5%  | 0.9%  | 31.6%   
1998  | 10.2  | 870.1  | 3.1  | 267.9  | 4.7%  | 12.9%  | 0.9%  | 37.2%   
1999  | 11.6  | 971.9  | 3.5  | 293.7  | 12.7%  | 2.0%  | 0.9%  | 34.7%   
2000  | 13.0  | 1,065.4  | 3.7  | 300.0  | 9.6%  | -0.8%  | 1.0%  | 35.2%   
2001  | 14.4  | 1,158.3  | 4.0  | 320.0  | 8.6%  | -0.1%  | 1.0%  | 34.9%   
2002  | 15.6  | 1,230.7  | 4.3  | 337.5  | 6.6%  | 0.0%  | 1.1%  | 39.7%   
2003  | 17.3  | 1,336.5  | 4.7  | 360.7  | 8.5%  | 1.0%  | 1.1%  | 43.1%   
2004  | 19.6  | 1,489.6  | 5.3  | 405.6  | 10.3%  | 3.9%  | 1.1%  | 42.7%   
2005  | 22.9  | 1,712.6  | 6.3  | 470.7  | 13.3%  | 6.3%  | 1.1%  | 35.6%   
2006  | 26.1  | 1,925.8  | 7.3  | 536.2  | 10.8%  | 6.1%  | 1.2%  | 30.7%   
2007  | 29.5  | 2,149.0  | 8.6  | 627.8  | 10.2%  | 7.7%  | 1.3%  | 29.4%   
2008  | 32.1  | 2,305.0  | 10.3  | 741.9  | 6.7%  | 25.0%  | 0.8%  | 27.0%   
2009  | 32.4  | 2,299.1  | 10.4  | 737.2  | 0.1%  | -0.7%  | 0.6%  | 28.5%   
2010  | 34.7  | 2,437.8  | 11.2  | 788.2  | 6.0%  | 4.0%  | 0.8%  | 28.7%   
2011  | 38.0  | 2,635.9  | 12.8  | 889.8  | 7.1%  | 5.5%  | 0.6%  | 29.7%   
2012  | 42.4  | 2,912.1  | 14.1  | 965.4  | 7.3%  | 2.9%  | 0.5%  | 31.5%   
2013  | 45.8  | 3,109.9  | 15.2  | 1,034.8  | 7.4%  | 3.0%  | 0.4%  | 31.7%   
2014  | 48.7  | 3,271.9  | 16.7  | 1,123.2  | 7.1%  | 3.9%  | 0.7%  | 31.9%   
2015  | 52.6  | 3,500.6  | 18.1  | 1,203.5  | 7.0%  | 1.2%  | 0.4%  | 31.2%   
2016  | 57.9  | 3,816.8  | 20.0  | 1,320.3  | 6.9%  | 3.0%  | 0.7%  | 29.1%   
2017  | 62.8  | 4,097.5  | 22.2  | 1,446.9  | 7.0%  | 2.9%  | 0.1%  | 30.0%   
2018  | 69.2  | 4,466.8  | 24.4  | 1,578.0  | 7.5%  | 2.4%  | 0.1%  | 28.6%   
2019  | 75.4  | 4,832.7  | 26.7  | 1,713.3  | 7.0%  | 2.0%  | 0.1%  | 29.0%   
2020  | 73.6  | 4,695.1  | 26.0  | 1,655.4  | -3.5%  | 2.9%  | 0.3%  | 31.6%   
2021  | 78.1  | 4,930.0  | 27.2  | 1,720.2  | 4.2%  | 3.1%  | n/a  | 33.4%   
2022  | 84.6  | 5,289.9  | 29.1  | 1,820.9  | 6.0%  | 2.8%  | n/a  | 35.4%   
2023  | 92.0  | 5,693.4  | 31.3  | 1,938.2  | 6.3%  | 3.0%  | n/a  | 38.0%   
2024  | 100.1  | 6,136.5  | 33.8  | 2,072.1  | 6.6%  | 3.0%  | n/a  | 41.0%   
2025  | 108.9  | 6,610.2  | 36.5  | 2,217.5  | 6.7%  | 3.0%  | n/a  | 43.9%   
2026  | 118.5  | 7,119.0  | 39.5  | 2,375.3  | 6.8%  | 3.0%  | n/a  | 46.7%   
  
## Economic sectors

### Garment industry

The garment industry represents the largest portion of Cambodia's
manufacturing sector, accounting for 80% of the country's exports. In 2012,
the exports grew to $4.61 billion up 8% over 2011. In the first half of 2013,
the garment industry reported exports worth $1.56 billion. The sector employs
335,400 workers, of which 91% are female.

The sector operates largely on the final phase of garment production, that is
turning yarns and fabrics into garments, as the country lacks a strong textile
manufacturing base. In 2005, there were fears that the end of the Multi Fibre
Arrangement would threaten Cambodia's garment industry; exposing it to stiff
competition with China's strong manufacturing capabilities. On the contrary,
Cambodia's garment industry at present continues to grow rapidly. This is can
be attributed to the country's open economic policy which has drawn in large
amounts of foreign investment into this sector of the economy.

Garment Factories by Ownership Nationality in 2010:

Nationality of Ownership | Ownership by percentage | Number of factories owned   
---|---|---  
Taiwan | 28% | 66   
China | 19% | 44   
Hong Kong | 17% | 39   
South Korea | 13% | 31   
Malaysia | 6% | 14   
Cambodia | 5% | 13   
Singapore | 4% | 10   
USA | 4% | 9   
Others | 4% | 10   
A garment factory worker in Cambodia undertaking health precautions

In 2010, 236 garment export-oriented factories were operating and registered
with GMAC, the Garment Manufacturers Association in Cambodia, with 93% being
foreign direct investment (FDI).

As seen in the table above, Cambodia's garment industry is characterized by a
small percentage of local ownership. This is a reflection of the deficiency of
skilled workers in the country as well as the limited leverage and autonomy
Cambodian factories have in strategic decisions. Another characteristic of the
industry is the country's competitive advantage as the only country where
garment factories are monitored and reported according to national and
international standards.

This has allowed Cambodia to secure its share of quotas for exports to the US
through the US-Cambodia Trade Agreement on Textiles and Apparel (1999–2004),
which linked market access to labor standards. However, the Cambodian garment
industry remains vulnerable to global competition due to a lack of adequate
infrastructure, labor unrest, the absence of a domestic textile industry, and
almost complete dependence on imported textile material.

GMAC is establishing a specialized training institute to train garment
workers. The institute is in Phnom Penh Special Economic Zone and will be
completed by late 2016.[_needs update_] It aims to train 1,600 garment workers
in the first three years and 240 university students each year as part of a
separate program.

### Agriculture

Cambodians planting rice, 2004.

Agriculture is the traditional mainstay of the Cambodian economy. Agriculture
accounted for 90 percent of GDP in 1985 and employed approximately 80 percent
of the work force. Rice is the principal commodity.

Major secondary crops include maize, cassava, sweet potatoes, groundnuts,
soybeans, sesame seeds, dry beans, and rubber. The principal commercial crop
is rubber. In the 1980s it was an important primary commodity, second only to
rice, and one of the country's few sources of foreign exchange.

### Tourism

In the 1960s, Cambodia was a prominent tourist destination in the Southeast
Asian region. Due to protracted periods of civil war, insurgencies, and
especially the genocidal regime of the Khmer Rouge (see Khmer Rouge Genocide),
Cambodia's tourism industry was reduced to being virtually non-existent. Since
the late 1990s, tourism is fast becoming Cambodia's second largest industry,
just behind the garment manufacturing. In 2006, Cambodia's tourism sector
generated a revenue of US$1.594 billion, which made up approximately 16% of
the country's GDP.

Angkor Wat in Siem Reap, Cambodia.

Cultural heritage tourism is especially popular in the country, with many
foreign tourists visiting the ancient Hindu temple of Angkor Wat located in
the Siem Reap province. Other popular tourist attractions include the Royal
Palace, Phnom Penh, as well as ecotourism spots such as Tonlé Sap Lake and the
Mekong River.

The tourism industry in Cambodia has been perpetuated by the development of
important transportation infrastructure; in particular Cambodia's two
international airports in Phnom Penh and Siem Reap respectively. To the
Cambodian economy, tourism has been a means for the accumulation of foreign
currency earnings and employment for the Cambodian workforce, with about
250,000 jobs generated in 2006. Meanwhile, challenges to the industry include
leakage of revenue to foreign markets due to a dependence on foreign goods as
well as the prevalence of the Child sex tourism industry.

### Gambling industry

NagaWorld in Phnom Penh

Gambling in Cambodia is officially illegal under the 1996 Law on Suppression
of Gambling, which outlawed all unauthorized forms of gambling and provided
for penalties ranging from monetary fines to short prison sentences, although
the Cambodian government's General Department of Prisons does not list
gambling as one of the 28 offenses punishable by imprisonment.

The prohibition on gambling, which also extends to all forms of online
gambling, only applies to Cambodian citizens. As of October 2015, there were
75 casinos catering to foreign tourists operating within Cambodia, providing
an estimated US$29 million in revenue to the national government in the first
nine months of the year and $2 billion in income for the casinos. Cambodian
citizens are allowed to gamble through government sponsored gaming including
five separate privately run national lotteries. Cambodians were also
previously permitted to play the slot machines located in the nation's
casinos, however due to complaints of violence related to gambling debts and
widespread problem gambling, slot machines were banned in 2009.

Gambling as a popular pastime is ingrained in Southeast Asian culture in
general and Cambodian culture in particular. Men who don't gamble are often
viewed as not masculine. Consequently, despite the laws against citizens
gambling, illegal gambling is widespread in Cambodia. The police forces in
Cambodia, ruled by one of the most corrupt governments in the world, often
look the other way as casinos freely allow locals to enter and provide private
rooms for government and law enforcement officials, who oftentimes have a
vested financial interest in the casinos, to conduct illegal gambling.

Extralegal activities are also widespread outside of the permitted casinos
ranging from cockfights and card rooms to sports book (primarily regional
football and Kun Khmer matches) and unauthorized lotteries. Most of these
activities are controlled by organized crime and protected by bribes to law
enforcement.

A number of societal issues plague Cambodia as a result of gambling, most
notably gambling addiction.

Russian Federation Boulevard in Phnom Penh.

### Construction

The increase in tourist arrivals has led to growing demand for hotels and
other forms of accommodation surrounding tourist hotspots. Siem Reap in
particular has seen a construction boom in recent years. The capital Phnom
Penh has also witnessed a growth in the construction and real estate sectors.
Recently, planned projects that have been on the pipeline for several years
have been shelved temporarily due to a reduction in foreign investment. From
2009, the Cambodian government has allowed foreigners to own condominiums.
This has helped in attracting real estate investors from Thailand, Malaysia,
Singapore and other countries.

The construction sector attracted investment of $2.1 billion in 2012 which is
a 72 per cent rise compared with 2011. Construction licenses issued stood at
1,694 projects in 2012, which was 20% lower than 2011 but they were higher in
value.

### Resources

Oil seeps were discovered in Cambodia as early as the 1950s by Russian and
Chinese geologists. Development of the industry was delayed, however, by the
Vietnam and Cambodian Civil Wars and the political uncertainty that followed.
Further discoveries of oil and natural gas deposits offshore in the early
2000s led to renewed domestic and international interest in Cambodia's
production possibilities. As of 2013, the US company Chevron, Japanese JOGMEC
and other international companies maintained production sites both on shore
and off. Chevron alone had invested over US$160 million and drilled 18 wells.

Sok Khavan, acting director general of the Cambodian National Petroleum
Authority, estimated that once the contracts are finalized and legal issues
resolved, the Cambodian government will receive approximately 70% of the
revenues, contributing to an economy in which the GDP is projected to increase
five-fold by 2030. In addition, there are 10,000 square miles offshore in the
Gulf of Thailand that holds potential reserves of 12-14 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas and an unspecified amount of oil. The rights to this territory are
currently a subject of dispute between Cambodia and Thailand, further delaying
any possible production developments. In early 2013 it was reported that the
two countries were close to a deal that would allow joint production to begin.

### Foreign aid

Rice milling is very important to the Cambodian economy.

Cambodia's emerging democracy has received strong international support. Under
the mandate of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC),
$1.72 billion (1.72 G$) was spent in an effort to bring basic security,
stability and democratic rule to the country. Various news and media reports
suggest that since 1993 the country has been the recipient of some US$10
billion in foreign aid.

With regards to economic assistance, official donors had pledged $880 million
at the Ministerial Conference on the Rehabilitation of Cambodia (MCRRC) in
Tokyo in June 1992. In addition to that figure, $119 million was pledged in
September 1993 at the International Committee on the Reconstruction of
Cambodia (ICORC) meeting in Paris, and $643 million at the March 1994 ICORC
meeting in Tokyo.

Cambodia experienced a shortfall in foreign aid in the year 2005 due to the
government's failure to pass anti-corruption laws, opening up a single
import/export window, increasing its spending on education, and complying with
policies of good governance. In response, the government adopted the National
Strategic Development Plan for 2006–10 (also known as the “Third Five-Year
Plan”). The plan focused on three major areas:

  * the speeding up of economic growth at an annual rate of 6-7%
  * eradicating corruption
  * developing public structures in favor of quality (i.e. by education, training, and healthcare) over quantity (i.e. rapid population growth)

### Banking

There are no significant barriers to bank entry. At the end of 2013, there
stood 35 commercial banks. Since 2011 new banks with offshore funding have
begun to enter the market.

### Telecommunications

### Energy

Cambodia has significant potential for developing renewable energy and could
potentially run its energy system on 100% renewable sources. The country,
however, remains one of the few countries in the ASEAN region that has not
adopted renewable energy targets. To attract more investment in renewable
energy Cambodia could adopt targets, improve renewable energy governance,
develop a regulatory framework, improve project bankability and facilitate
market entry for international investors. Due to high vulnerability to climate
change, it is recommended that Cambodia focuses on developing renewable energy
away from fossil fuels as part of climate change mitigation measures.

### Scam centres

Cyber scam center operations in Cambodia have transformed parts of the
country, notably areas like Bokor Mountain, Sihanoukville, Ream City, and Dara
Sakor, into centers for a brutal online fraud industry. This illicit industry,
primarily controlled by Chinese billionaires, operates with the complicity of
high-ranking Cambodian political elites who not only profit from it but also
facilitated its development through infrastructure projects. The origins of
this industry trace back to Cambodia's participation in China's Belt and Road
Initiative around 2013. This led to a surge of Chinese investment in
infrastructure and real estate, including special economic zones (SEZs) and
mega-casinos. Many of these "developers" were later revealed to be fugitives
or individuals with criminal backgrounds, some of whom have since faced
international sanctions. With China's 2019 ban on online gambling and the
subsequent COVID-19 pandemic, many of these empty facilities pivoted to online
scamming. This period saw a significant increase in human trafficking, with an
estimated 100,000 people, primarily foreign nationals, trafficked into
Cambodia by September 2023.

A 2024 study found that funds stolen by criminal syndicates in Cambodia was
estimated to exceed $12.5 billion annually—half the country’s formal GDP,
based on a very conservative estimate. Many scam compounds in Cambodia are
owned by local elites There are lucrative incentives for these elites to
associate with and materially support criminal activity, often hidden behind
legitimate-seeming fronts like casinos, resorts, and special economic zones
(SEZs). Criminal groups have established complex money-laundering operations
to move illicit funds into the formal economy, indicating a flow of fraulent
funds that can potentially corrupt international financial institutions and
legitimate sectors of the economy.

### Other industry

Cambodia is encouraging investment in EV assembly plants. Cambodia's 2022
Long-Term Strategy for Carbon Neutrality to have 40% EV cars and busses and
70% electric motorbikes by 2050. It has significantly reduced import duties on
EVs.

## Infrastructure and workforce

### Transport

A national transport map of Cambodia National Highway 1 - Kien Svay, Kandal
Province A rural road in Cambodia The system of transport in Cambodia,
rudimentary at the best of times, was severely damaged in the chaos that
engulfed the nation in the latter half of the 20th century. The country's weak
transport infrastructure hindered emergency relief efforts, exacerbating the
logistical issues of procurement of supplies in general and their
distribution. Cambodia received Soviet technical assistance and equipment to
support the maintenance of the transportation network.

### Child labour

A Cambodian child scavenging in a landfill site.

Child labour refers to the full-time employment of children under a minimum
legal age. In 2003, an International Labour Organization (ILO) survey reported
that one in every ten children in the capital above the age of seven was
engaged in child domestic labour. Children who are too young to work in the
fields work as scavengers. They spend their days rummaging in dumps looking
for items that can be sold for money. Children also often work in the garment
and textile industry, in prostitution, and in the military.

In Cambodia, the state had ratified both the Minimum Age Convention (C138) in
1999 and Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (C182) in 2006, which are
adopted by the International Labour Organization (ILO). For the former
convention, Cambodia had specified the minimum age to work to be at age 14.
Yet, significant levels of child labour appear to be found in Cambodia.

In 1998, ILO estimated that 24.1% of children in Cambodia aged between 10 and
14 were economically active. Many of these children work long hours and
Cambodia Human Development Report 2000 reported that approximately 65,000
children between the ages of 5 and 13 worked 25 hours a week and did not
attend school. There are also many initiative and policies put in place to
decrease the prevalence of child labour such as the United States generalized
system of preferences, the U.S.-Cambodia textile agreement, ILO Garment Sector
Working Conditions Improvement Project, and ChildWise Tourism.

There is a need to eliminate child labour in Cambodia as a report by UNICEF
states that child labourers could be missing out on education. When children
do not attend school, they are denied the knowledge and skills needed for
national development. Without education and vital life skills, they are
vulnerable to abuse and exploitation, which may exacerbate the existing cycle
of poverty in their families. Consequently, this lack in productivity due to
lack of education will hold back economic growth in Cambodia.

### Trade - EBA Issues

The announcement from February 12, 2020, was to suspend "Everything But Arms"
(EBA) trade preferences between EU and Cambodia. The country has known to be
the second largest beneficiary from EBA's program. The EU's preliminary
conclusion sent to Cambodian government on November 12, 2019, because Cambodia
failed to address serious human and labor rights concerns under Human Rights
Watch. Moreover, the issue behind ending the opposition party (CNRP) and
dropping charges against the leader of CNRP violated the right to freedom of
expression.

## Challenges for industrial development

Although Cambodia exports mainly garments and products from agriculture and
fisheries, it is striving to diversify the economy. There is some evidence of
expansion in value-added exports from a low starting point, largely thanks to
the manufacture of electrical goods and telecommunications by foreign
multinationals implanted in the country. Between 2008 and 2013, high-tech
exports climbed from just US$3.8million to US$76.5 million.

It will be challenging for Cambodia to enhance the technological capacity of
the many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) active in agriculture,
engineering and the natural sciences. Whereas the large foreign firms in
Cambodia that are the main source of value-added exports tend to specialize in
electrical machinery and telecommunications, the principal task for science
and technology policy will be to facilitate spillovers in terms of skills and
innovation capability from these large operators towards smaller firms and
across other sectors.

There is little evidence that the Law on Patents, Utility Model Certificates
and Industrial Designs (2006) has been of practical use, thus far, to any but
the larger foreign firms operating in Cambodia. By 2012, 27 patent
applications had been filed, all by foreigners. Of the 42 applications for
industrial design received up to 2012, 40 had been filed by foreigners.
Nevertheless, the law has no doubt encouraged foreign firms to introduce
technological improvements to their on-shore production systems, which can
only be beneficial.

## Statistics

Investment (gross fixed)

    3% of GDP (2011 est.)
Household income or consumption by percentage share

  * lowest 10%: 2.6%
  * highest 10%: 23.7% (2011)

Agriculture - products

  * rice,
  * rubber,
  * corn,
  * vegetables,
  * cashews,
  * tapioca,
  * silk

Industries

  * tourism, garments, construction, rice milling, fishing, wood and wood products, rubber, cement, gem mining, textiles

Industrial production growth rate

  * 5.7% (2011 est.)

Electricity

...  | 2010  | 2011   
---|---|---  
production | 1.273 billion kWh | ...   
consumption | 1.272 billion kWh | ...   
exports | 0 kWh | ...   
imports | 274 million kWh | ...   
  
Exchange rates

Year  | Riels (KHR) per US dollar   
---|---  
2012  | 4,097   
2011  | 4,395.62   
2010  | 4,145   
2009  | 4,139.33   
2008  | 4,070.94   
2007  | 4,006   
2006  | 4,103