The economy of Malaysia is an emerging and developing, upper-middle income,
highly industrialised, mixed economy. It ranks the 36th largest in the world
in terms of nominal GDP, however, when measured by purchasing power parity,
its GDP climbs to the 30th largest. Malaysia is forecasted to have a nominal
GDP of nearly half a trillion US$ by the end of 2024. The labour productivity
of Malaysian workers is the 62nd highest in the world and significantly higher
than China, Indonesia, Vietnam, and the Philippines.

Malaysia excels above similar income group peers in terms of business
competitiveness and innovation. Global Competitiveness Report 2024 ranks
Malaysian economy as the 34th most competitive country economy in the world
while Global Innovation Index 2024 ranks Malaysia as the 33rd most innovative
nation globally.

Malaysia is the 35th most trade intensive economy globally; higher than
Denmark, Norway, Germany, and Sweden with total trade activities at 132% of
its GDP. In addition, the Malaysian economy has developed vertical and
horizontal integration across several export linked industry while capturing a
significant global market share for manufactured products and commodities
ranging from integrated circuit, semiconductor, and palm oil to liquefied
natural gas. Furthermore, Malaysia is an important nexus in the global
semiconductor market and is the third largest exporter of semiconductor
devices in the world. Malaysia has unveiled plan to target over US$100 billion
in investment for its semiconductor industry as it positions itself as a
global manufacturing hub.

By mid-2024, the country attracted large foreign direct investment centered on
the global artificial intelligence boom with foreign technology companies like
Google, Microsoft and ByteDance flocked to the country and invested US$2
billion, US$2.2 billion, and US$2.1 billion, respectively, to capitalise on
Malaysia's competitive advantage in the data center and hyperscale
construction due to its highly educated workforce, cheap land acquisition, low
water and electricity cost, and the absence of natural disasters. This is
expected to consolidate Malaysia position as a cloud computing hub for wider
Asia, increasing its high value sector and propel its economy to meet the
government high-income economy goal.

Overall, the Malaysian economy is highly robust and diversified with the
export value of high-tech products in 2022 standing around US$66 billion, the
third highest in ASEAN. Malaysia exports the second largest volume and value
of palm oil products globally, after Indonesia.

Malaysians enjoy a relatively affluent lifestyle compared to many of its
neighbours in Southeast Asia. This is due to a fast-growing export-oriented
economy, a relatively low national income tax, highly affordable local food
and transport fuel, as well as a fully subsidized single-payer public
healthcare system. Malaysia has a newly industrialised market economy, which
is relatively open and state-oriented.

## History

As one of three countries that control the Strait of Malacca, international
trade plays a very significant role in Malaysia's economy. At one time, it was
the largest producer of tin, rubber and palm oil in the world. Manufacturing
has a large influence in the country's economy, accounting for over 40% of the
GDP.

In the 1980s, Malaysia began to imitate the four Asian Tiger economies (Hong
Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan) and committed itself to a transition
from being reliant on mining and agriculture to an economy that depends more
on manufacturing. The predominantly mining and agricultural based Malaysian
economy began a transition towards a more multi-sector economy. Since the
1980s the industrial sector has led Malaysia's growth. High levels of
investment played a significant role in this. With Japanese investment, heavy
industries flourished and within several years, Malaysian exports became the
country's primary growth engine. Malaysia consistently achieved more than 7%
GDP growth along with low inflation in the 1980s and the 1990s.

In 1991, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad outlined his ideal, Vision 2020 in
which Malaysia would become a self-sufficient industrialised nation by 2020.
In 2013, Minister in the Prime Minister's Department Tan Sri Nor Mohamed
Yakcop said Malaysia could attain developed country status in 2018 if the
country's economic growth remains constant or increases. In 2023, the
Malaysian government unveiled an industrial policy, the New Industrial Master
Plan (NIMP) 2030, a guideline for the nation's manufacturing sector to grow
and achieve macroeconomic targets, aiming for RM587.5 billion (from RM364.1
billion) contribution to Malaysia's GDP, 3.3 million (from 2.7 million)
employed persons and a median salary of RM4,510 (from RM1,976) by 2030.

Malaysia experienced an economic boom and underwent rapid development during
the late 20th century and had a GDP per capita (nominal) of US$11,648.70 in
2023, and is considered a newly industrialised country. In 2009, the GDP (PPP)
was US$378.5 billion and GDP per capita (PPP) was US$13,468.00, about one
third of the 2023 figures.

In 2022, the Household Income Survey undertaken by the government indicated
that there were 7.9 million households in Malaysia, with an average of 3.8
members in each household. The average household income of Malaysia increased
by 69.6% to RM8,479 a month, compared to RM5,000 in 2012.

According to a HSBC report in 2012, Malaysia is expected to become the world's
21st largest economy by 2050, with a GDP of $1.2 trillion (Year 2000 dollars)
and a GDP per capita of $29,247 (Year 2000 dollars). The report also says "The
electronic equipment, petroleum, and liquefied natural gas producer will see a
substantial increase in income per capita. Malaysian life expectancy,
relatively high level of schooling, and above average fertility rate will help
in its rapid expansion." Viktor Shvets, the managing director in Credit
Suisse, has said "Malaysia has all the right ingredients to become a developed
nation."

In early 2020, the Malaysian economy was severely afflicted by the COVID-19
pandemic that eventually expanded to the rest of the world, causing an
economic shutdown and downturn in the country, the worst since 2008.[_citation
needed_] In early December 2020 during the pandemic, Fitch Ratings downgraded
the country's rating from A− to BBB+. Some, such as Hoo Ke Ping at the
Kingsley Strategic Institute, suggested that this was because of a lack of
communication between the new government and the ratings agency. Others, such
as Carmelo Ferlito, from the Centre for Market Education, said it might
require something more substantial as the recent budget lacked a strategy for
the recovery as well as addressing the political tensions, and also, Shan
Saeed at Juwai IQI suggested that the agency had lost its relevance as the
analysis was "behind the curve".[_citation needed_] However, the COVID-19
recession in the country ended by 1 April 2022 as the COVID-19 Omicron
infection rate continued to fall ahead of the endemic phase.

## Economic policies

### Monetary policy

Prior to the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, the Malaysian Ringgit (MYR) was a
floating currency that traded at RM2.50 at the dollar. As speculative
activities spread across the region, the Ringgit fell to as much as RM4.10 to
the dollar in matter of weeks.

An executive decision led by the then Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad decided
to peg the MYR to the dollar and impose capital controls to prevent excessive
outflow of the Ringgit in the open market. The Ringgit became was pegged at
RM3.80 to the US dollar and a traveller had to declare to the central bank if
taking out more than RM10,000 out of the country and the Ringgit itself .

The fixed exchange rate was abandoned in favour of the floating exchange rate
in July 2005, hours after China announced the same move. At this point, the
Ringgit was still not internationalised. The Ringgit continued to strengthen
to 3.18 to the dollar by March 2008 and appreciated as low as 2.94 to the
dollar in May 2011. Meanwhile, many aspects of capital control have been
slowly relaxed by Bank Negara Malaysia. However, the government continues to
not internationalise the Ringgit. The government stated that the Ringgit will
be internationalised once it is ready.

Bank Negara Malaysia for the time being, uses interest rate targeting. The
Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) is their policy instrument, and is used to guide
the short term interbank rates which will hopefully influence inflation and
economic growth.

### Affirmative action

Tun Abdul Razak, who was then Prime Minister, implemented the affirmative
action policy named as New Economic Policy (NEP) soon after 13 May Incident in
1969. Prior to the incident, the poverty rates among Malays were extremely
high (65%) as was discontent between races, particularly towards the Chinese,
who controlled 74% of the economy at the time. Through NEP, the Bumiputeras
majority were given priority and special privileges in housing developments,
scholarship admission and also for ownership of publicly listed companies.

The NEP was created in 1971 with the aim of bringing Malays a 30% share of the
economy of Malaysia and eradicating poverty amongst Malays, primarily through
encouraging enterprise ownership by Bumiputeras. After 40 years of the
program, bumiputra equity ownership rose to 23% worth RM167.7 billion in 2010
against 2.4% in 1970.

The NEP was accused of creating an oligarchy, and creating a 'subsidy
mentality'. Political parties such as Parti Keadilan Rakyat and Democratic
Action Party proposed a new policy which will be equal for every Malaysian,
regardless of race. When the Democratic Action Party was elected in the state
of Penang in 2008, it announced that it would do away with the NEP, claiming
that it "... breeds nepotism, corruption and systemic inefficiency".

Wolfgang Kasper, a professor of economics at University of New South Wales,
and once an adviser to Malaysia's Finance Ministry, criticized the NEP, saying
that "NEP handouts (are) making Malays lazy, corrupt & swell-headed. Worst of
all, it keeps them poor." He also criticized the Federal Government giving
cash-handouts and financial aid instead of providing equal access to education
to help the marginalized poor to lift their income status.

On 21 April 2009, the prime minister Najib Tun Razak announced the
liberalization of 27 services sub-sector by abolishing the 30% bumiputera
requirement. The move was seen as a government effort to increase investment
in the service sector of the economy. According to the premier, many more
sectors of the economy would be liberalized.

On 30 June 2009, the prime minister announced further liberation moves
including the dismantling of the Bumiputera equity quotas and repealing the
guidelines of the Foreign Investment Committee, which was responsible to
monitor foreign shareholding in Malaysian companies. However, any Malaysian
companies that wished to list in Malaysia would still need to offer 50 percent
of public shareholding spread to Bumiputera investors.

### Subsidies and price controls

The Malaysian government subsidises and controls prices on many essential
items to keep the prices low. Prices of items such as palm oil, cooking oil,
petrol, flour, bread, rice and other essentials have been kept under market
prices to keep cost of living low. As of 2022, government expenditure on
subsidies stood at RM70.3 billion (US$15.96 billion), with fuel alone taking
up RM52 billion (US$11.8 billion) or 74% of total subsidies.

Since 2010, the government has been gradually reforming Malaysia's subsidy
system, via a series of reductions in subsidies for fuel and sugar to improve
government finances and to improve economic efficiency. As a result, in
December 2014, the government officially ended all fuel subsidies and
implemented a 'managed float' system, taking advantage of low oil prices at
the time, potentially saving the government almost RM20 billion ringgit
(US$5.72 billion) annually.

On 10 June 2024, the Malaysian government ended the previously
reimplementation of blanket subsidies on diesel fuel. Instead, a more
selective, targeted subsidy was implemented, where cash assistance was
directly disbursed to qualified individuals or fleet cards to eligible
logistics vehicles. Plans for removal of petrol subsidies have yet to be
announced but it is expected to take place in 2025. The withdrawal of said
subsidies will target the top 15% of income earners, while the remaining 85%
will continue to enjoy the status quo.

### Sovereign wealth funds

The government owns and operates several sovereign wealth funds that invest in
local companies and also foreign companies. One such fund is Khazanah Nasional
Berhad, established in 1993, and as of 31 December 2023, had an asset size of
RM126.2 billion (US$27.46 billion). The fund invests in major companies in
Malaysia such as CIMB in the banking sector, UEM Group in the construction
sector, Telekom Malaysia and Axiata in the communications industry, Malaysia
Airports and Malaysia Airlines in the aerospace industry, as well as Tenaga
Nasional in the energy sector

Another fund owned by the Malaysian government is the Employees Provident
Fund, a retirement fund that as of 31 March 2024, had an asset size of RM1.19
trillion (US$251.61 billion), of which overseas investments account for 38% of
total assets, making it the 4th largest pension fund in Asia and 13th largest
in the world. Like Khazanah Nasional, EPF invests and owns several major
companies in Malaysia such as RHB Bank. EPF investment is diversified over a
number of sectors but almost 40% of their investment are in the services
sector.

Permodalan Nasional Berhad is another major fund manager controlled by the
Malaysian Government. It offers capital guaranteed mutual funds such as Amanah
Saham Bumiputera and Amanah Saham Wawasan 2020 which are open only to
Malaysian and in some cases, Bumiputeras.

### Government influence

Although the federal government promotes private enterprise and ownership in
the economy, the economic direction of the country is heavily influenced by
the government through five years development plans since independence. The
economy is also influenced by the government through agencies such as the
Economic Planning Unit and government-linked wealth funds such as Khazanah
Nasional Berhad, Employees Provident Fund and Permodalan Nasional Berhad.

The government's development plans, called the Malaysian Plan, currently the
Twelfth Malaysia Plan, started in 1950 during the British colonial rule. The
plans were largely centred around accelerating the growth of the economy by
selectively investing in sectors of the economy and building infrastructure to
support said sectors. For example, in the current national plan, three primary
aspects of the nation are being focused, consisting of strategies to energise
and maintain economic empowerment, environmental sustainability and social
reengineering.

Government-linked investment vehicles such as Khazanah Nasional Berhad,
Employees Provident Fund and Permodalan Nasional Berhad invest in and own
companies in major sectors of the Malaysian economy.

## Data

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF
staff estimates in 2022–2027). Inflation below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$nominal) | GDP per capita (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 46.3  | 3,337.8  | 26.8  | 1,927.0  | 7.4%  | 6.7%  | n/a  | n/a   
1981  | 54.3  | 3,813.0  | 27.3  | 1,920.1  | 6.9%  | 9.7%  | n/a  | n/a   
1982  | 61.0  | 4,182.4  | 29.3  | 2,006.5  | 5.9%  | 5.8%  | n/a  | n/a   
1983  | 67.4  | 4,505.6  | 32.7  | 2,189.6  | 6.3%  | 3.7%  | n/a  | n/a   
1984  | 75.2  | 4,908.0  | 37.1  | 2,419.5  | 7.8%  | 3.9%  | n/a  | n/a   
1985  | 76.9  | 4,862.0  | 34.1  | 2,154.5  | -0.9%  | 2.6%  | 6.9%  | n/a   
1986  | 79.4  | 4,883.2  | 30.3  | 1,864.0  | 1.2%  | 0.4%  | 8.3%  | n/a   
1987  | 85.7  | 5,139.6  | 34.5  | 2,070.0  | 5.4%  | 0.7%  | 8.2%  | n/a   
1988  | 97.6  | 5,708.0  | 37.8  | 2,213.9  | 9.9%  | 0.3%  | 8.1%  | n/a   
1989  | 110.6  | 6,316.4  | 41.7  | 2,380.5  | 9.1%  | 2.6%  | 6.7%  | n/a   
1990  | 125.1  | 6,846.2  | 47.2  | 2,585.8  | 9.0%  | 3.0%  | 5.1%  | 74.1%   
1991  | 141.6  | 7,636.5  | 53.5  | 2,885.1  | 9.5%  | 4.3%  | 4.3%  | 67.3%   
1992  | 157.7  | 8,272.5  | 64.5  | 3,380.2  | 8.9%  | 4.8%  | 3.7%  | 59.1%   
1993  | 177.5  | 9,053.0  | 72.9  | 3,717.4  | 9.9%  | 3.5%  | 3.0%  | 51.1%   
1994  | 197.9  | 9,827.3  | 81.1  | 4,028.4  | 9.2%  | 3.7%  | 2.9%  | 43.7%   
1995  | 222.0  | 10,731.8  | 96.6  | 4,672.1  | 9.8%  | 3.5%  | 3.1%  | 38.2%   
1996  | 248.6  | 11,715.0  | 109.9  | 5,176.3  | 10.0%  | 3.5%  | 2.5%  | 32.8%   
1997  | 271.4  | 12,469.0  | 108.8  | 4,997.0  | 7.3%  | 2.7%  | 2.4%  | 29.6%   
1998  | 254.3  | 11,386.4  | 78.6  | 3,520.9  | -7.4%  | 5.3%  | 3.2%  | 33.6%   
1999  | 273.7  | 11,946.7  | 86.2  | 3,762.8  | 6.1%  | 2.7%  | 3.4%  | 34.4%   
2000  | 304.2  | 12,945.8  | 102.1  | 4,347.7  | 8.7%  | 1.6%  | 3.1%  | 32.5%   
2001  | 312.6  | 12,959.3  | 101.1  | 4,189.1  | 0.5%  | 1.4%  | 3.7%  | 38.1%   
2002  | 334.6  | 13,532.2  | 109.8  | 4,441.8  | 5.4%  | 1.8%  | 3.5%  | 39.5%   
2003  | 361.0  | 14,256.3  | 120.0  | 4,740.3  | 5.8%  | 1.1%  | 3.6%  | 41.4%   
2004  | 395.8  | 15,278.8  | 135.9  | 5,244.9  | 6.8%  | 1.4%  | 3.6%  | 42.0%   
2005  | 428.5  | 16,184.8  | 150.4  | 5,678.7  | 5.0%  | 3.0%  | 3.6%  | 40.8%   
2006  | 466.4  | 17,383.1  | 170.5  | 6,355.0  | 5.6%  | 3.6%  | 3.3%  | 39.7%   
2007  | 509.2  | 18,789.4  | 202.9  | 7,485.9  | 6.3%  | 2.0%  | 3.2%  | 39.3%   
2008  | 544.0  | 19,711.4  | 242.1  | 8,771.0  | 4.8%  | 5.4%  | 3.3%  | 39.4%   
2009  | 539.2  | 19,202.1  | 212.0  | 7,550.3  | -1.5%  | 0.6%  | 3.7%  | 50.4%   
2010  | 586.8  | 20,525.5  | 258.8  | 9,054.1  | 7.5%  | 1.7%  | 3.3%  | 51.2%   
2011  | 630.7  | 21,701.7  | 302.6  | 10,413.7  | 5.3%  | 3.2%  | 3.1%  | 51.9%   
2012  | 677.6  | 22,963.3  | 319.2  | 10,815.1  | 5.5%  | 1.7%  | 3.0%  | 53.8%   
2013  | 701.7  | 23,224.6  | 328.1  | 10,858.4  | 4.7%  | 2.1%  | 3.1%  | 55.7%   
2014  | 745.4  | 24,273.0  | 343.1  | 11,172.4  | 6.0%  | 3.1%  | 2.9%  | 55.4%   
2015  | 750.8  | 24,074.1  | 301.4  | 9,663.3  | 5.0%  | 2.1%  | 3.2%  | 57.0%   
2016  | 783.9  | 24,779.9  | 301.9  | 9,544.2  | 4.5%  | 2.1%  | 3.5%  | 55.8%   
2017  | 829.3  | 25,897.2  | 319.2  | 9,969.5  | 5.8%  | 3.8%  | 3.4%  | 54.4%   
2018  | 890.2  | 27,491.3  | 359.0  | 11,086.1  | 4.8%  | 1.0%  | 3.3%  | 55.6%   
2019  | 946.1  | 29,091.6  | 365.3  | 11,231.5  | 4.4%  | 0.7%  | 3.3%  | 57.1%   
2020  | 904.6  | 27,760.7  | 337.6  | 10,361.3  | -5.5%  | -1.1%  | 4.5%  | 67.7%   
2021  | 971.3  | 29,702.4  | 373.0  | 11,407.7  | 3.1%  | 2.5%  | 4.7%  | 69.0%   
2022  | 1,096.5  | 33,112.7  | 434.1  | 13,107.9  | 5.4%  | 3.2%  | 4.5%  | 69.6%   
2023  | 1,185.3  | 35,353.6  | 467.5  | 13,942.6  | 4.4%  | 2.8%  | 4.3%  | 70.0%   
2024  | 1,269.7  | 37,416.1  | 503.1  | 14,826.0  | 4.9%  | 2.4%  | 4.2%  | 70.0%   
2025  | 1,350.5  | 39,335.8  | 539.6  | 15,717.8  | 4.4%  | 2.4%  | 4.2%  | 70.2%   
2026  | 1,437.2  | 41,395.7  | 577.2  | 16,623.9  | 4.4%  | 2.4%  | 4.2%  | 70.2%   
2027  | 1,522.7  | 43,387.1  | 615.0  | 17,523.6  | 3.9%  | 2.5%  | 4.2%  | 70.6%   
  
## Currency

The only legal tender in Malaysia is the Malaysian ringgit. As of September
2024, the ringgit traded at MYR 4.12 to the US dollar. This was a significant
change from the rate of MYR 4.80 to the dollar recorded in February 2024, an
appreciation of 16.5%.

The ringgit is not internationalised. Since September 1998, due to the 1997
Asian financial crisis in which then Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad imposed
capital controls on the currency, due to speculative short-selling of the
ringgit. Due to a series of capital controls, the currency was pegged between
September 1998 and July 2005 at MYR 3.80 to the dollar after dropping from MYR
2.50 to the dollar, and at one point, MYR 4.80 to the dollar.

In recent years, Bank Negara Malaysia has begun to relax certain rules on
capital controls, although the currency itself is still not traded
internationally. According to the Bank Governor, the ringgit will be
internationalised when it is ready.

In September 2010, in an interview with CNBC, Dato' Seri Najib Tun Razak, who
was then Prime Minister of Malaysia and also held the position of Finance
Minister, said that the government was open to enabling the ringgit to
offshore trading if the move would help the economy. He added that before such
a move could be made, it would ensure that rules and regulation were in place
to avoid abuse of the currency.

## Natural resources

Palm oil estate in Malaysia.

Malaysia is well-endowed with natural resources in areas such as agriculture,
forestry and minerals. It is an exporter of natural and agricultural
resources, the most valuable exported resource being petroleum. In the
agricultural sector, Malaysia is one of the top exporters of natural rubber
and palm oil, which together with timber and timber products, cocoa, pepper,
pineapple and tobacco dominate the growth of the sector. As of 2023, the
percentage arable land in Malaysia was 9.7%. Croplands consists of 17.49%
while other land uses consists of 77.07%. As of 2009, irrigated land covered
3,800 km2. Total renewable water resources made up 580 cubic km as of 2011.

Tin and petroleum are the two main mineral resources that are of major
significance in the Malaysian economy. Malaysia was once the world's largest
producer of tin until the collapse of the tin market in the early 1980s. In
the 19th and 20th century, tin played a predominant role in the Malaysian
economy, with Malaysia accounting for over 31% of global output. It was only
in 1972 that petroleum and natural gas took over from tin as the mainstay of
the mineral extraction sector. Other minerals of some importance or
significance include copper, bauxite, iron-ore and coal together with
industrial minerals like clay, kaolin, silica, limestone, barite, phosphates
and dimension stones such as granite as well as marble blocks and slabs. Small
quantities of gold are produced.

In 2019, the country was the 11th largest world producer of manganese; the
11th largest world producer of tin, the 12th largest world producer of
bauxite, and the 19th largest world producer of lime.

### Energy resources

Malaysia held proven oil reserves of 6.9 billion barrels as of January 2022,
the fourth-highest reserves in Asia-Pacific after China, India, and Vietnam.
Nearly all of Malaysia's oil comes from offshore fields. The continental shelf
is divided into three producing basins: the basin offshore Eastern Peninsular
Malaysia in the west and the Sarawak and Sabah basins in the east. Most of the
country's oil reserves are located in the Peninsular basin and tend to be
light and sweet crude. Malaysia's benchmark crude oil, Tapis Blend, is a light
and sweet crude oil, with an API gravity of 42.7° and a sulphur content of
0.04% by weight.

Malaysia held 87.8 trillion cubic feet (Tcf) of proven natural gas reserves as
of 2021, and was the third-largest natural gas reserve holder in the Asia-
Pacific region after China and Indonesia. More than half of the country's
natural gas reserves are located in its eastern areas, predominantly offshore
Sarawak. Most of Malaysia's gas reserves are associated with oil basins,
although Sarawak and Sabah have an increasing amount of non-associated gas
reserves that have offset some of the declines from mature oil and gas basins
offshore Peninsular Malaysia.

## Business environment

In 2015, Malaysia's economy was one of the most competitive in the world,
ranking 14th in the world and 5th for countries with a population of over 20
million, higher than countries like Australia, United Kingdom, South Korea and
Japan.

In 2015, Malaysia was the 6th most attractive country for foreign investors,
ranked in the Baseline Profitability Index (BPI) published by Foreign Policy
Magazine.

The government is moving towards a more business friendly environment by
setting up a special task force to facilitate business called PEMUDAH, which
means "simplifier" in Malay. Highlights includes easing restrictions and
requirement to hire expatriates, shorten time to do land transfers and
increasing the limit of sugar storage (a controlled item in Malaysia) for
companies.

Malaysia was ranked 33rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2020, up from 35th
in 2019.

## Taxation

In 2016, the Inland Revenue Board of Malaysia lowered the effective tax rate
to 24% for businesses with capital exceeding RM2.5 million (approximately
US$550,000). For smaller companies, the rate was 19%.

The Malaysian government also imposes government taxes such as the Sales and
Services tax (SST) and real estate taxes. The current rate of SST is at 6%
while disposal of property is subject to a schedule of period holding the
property.

## External trade

In 2021, Malaysia's total external trade totaled RM2,227 billion
(approximately US$530 billion), made up of RM1,239 billion (approximately
US$295 billion) of exports and RM987 billion (approximately US$235 billion) of
imports, making Malaysia the world's 21st largest exporter and the world's
25th largest importer.

Malaysia's largest trading partner is China. Malaysia has been China's top
trading partner within ASEAN for five years in a row since 2008. The two-way
trade volume between China and Malaysia in 2013 reached $106 billion, making
Malaysia China's third-largest trade partner in Asia, just behind Japan and
South Korea and eighth largest overall. On 31 May 2014, during Najib Razak's
visit to China where he was welcomed by China's Premier Li Keqiang, China and
Malaysia pledged to increase bilateral trade to US$160 billion by 2017. They
also agreed to upgrade economic and financial co-operation, especially in the
production of halal food, water processing and railway construction.

Malaysia's second largest trading partner is Singapore and Malaysia is
Singapore's biggest trading partner, with bilateral trade totalling roughly
US$91 billion in 2012, accounting for over a fifth of total trade within
ASEAN.

Malaysia's third largest trading partner is Japan, amounting RM137.45 billion
(US$42 billion) of trade in 2014, an increase of 1.4% compared with to 2013.
Out of this, exports totalled RM82.71 billion (US$25.6 billion), a growth of
4.4% cent while imports contracted 2.9% to RM54.75 billion (US$16.74 billion).
Malaysian Ambassador to Japan Datuk Ahmad Izlan Idris said the main exports
from Malaysia to Japan were liquefied natural gas (LNG), electrical and
electronics as well as chemical-based products. He said Malaysia's main
imports from Japan were electrical and electronics, machines and equipment as
well as spare parts and accessories for vehicles and cars.

Malaysia is an important trading partner for the United States. In 1999, two-
way bilateral trade between the US and Malaysia totalled US$30.5 billion, with
US exports to Malaysia totalling US$9.1 billion and US imports from Malaysia
increasing to US$21.4 billion. Malaysia was the United States' 10th-largest
trading partner and its 12th-largest export market. During the first half of
2000, US exports totalled US$5 billion, while US imports from Malaysia reached
US$11.6 billion.

### Statistics

Year  | Goods exports  
(billion US$) | Goods imports  
(in billion US$) | Net trade  
(in billion US$)  
---|---|---|---  
2023  | $231.4  | $201.5  | $30.0   
2020  | $186.1  | $153.2  | $32.8   
2015  | $174.6  | $146.7  | $27.9   
2010  | $187.3  | $148.9  | $28.4   
2005  | $141.6  | $108.7  | $33.0   
2000  | $98.2  | $77.5  | $20.7   
1990  | $28.8  | $26.3  | $2.5   
1980  | $13.0  | $10.6  | $2.3   
1975  | $3.8  | $3.6  | $0.2   
  
## Agriculture sector

Rubber plantation in Malaysia

Agriculture is now a minor sector of the Malaysian economy, accounting for
7.1% of Malaysia's GDP in 2014 and employing 11.1% of Malaysia's labour force,
contrasting with the 1960s when agriculture accounted for 37% of Malaysia's
GDP and employed 66.2% of the labour force. The crops grown by the
agricultural sector has also significantly shifted from food crops like paddy
and coconut to industrial crops like palm oil and rubber, which in 2005
contributed to 83.7% of total agricultural land use, compared to 68.5% in
1960.

### Palm Oil Industry

Despite its minor contribution to Malaysia's GDP, Malaysia has a significant
foothold in the world's agricultural sector, being the world's second largest
producer of palm oil in 2012 producing 18.79 million tonnes of crude palm oil
on roughly 5,000,000 hectares (19,000 sq mi) of land. Though Indonesia
produces more palm oil, Malaysia is the world's largest exporter of palm oil
having exported 18 million tonnes of palm oil products in 2011.

In March 2019, the European Commission concluded that palm oil cultivation
results in excessive deforestation and its use in transport fuel should be
phased out by 2030. In response, Mahathir Mohamad alleged that the European
Union is at risk of starting a trade war with Malaysia regarding its "grossly
unfair" policies geared towards decreasing the use of palm oil, which Mahathir
stated was "unfair" and an example of "rich people...[trying] to impoverish
poor people".

In July 2024, Hong Wai Onn from the Research Institute for Sustainable
Excellence and Leadership asserted that the European Union’s classification of
palm oil as a high indirect land use change (ILUC) risk biofuel is flawed. He
called for a reevaluation of ILUC factors to ensure more accurate carbon
intensity measurements. He argued that ignoring this issue unfairly limits
palm oil’s potential as a low ILUC-risk biofuel and its role in supporting
global climate efforts.

## Industry sector

Science policies in Malaysia are regulated by the Ministry of Science,
Technology, and Innovation. The country is one of the world's largest
exporters of semiconductor devices, electrical devices, and IT and
communication products.

Malaysia's industrial sector accounts for 36.8%, over a third of the country's
GDP in 2014, and employs 36% of the labour force in 2012. The industrial
sector mostly contributed by the electronics industry, automotive industry and
construction industry.

### Electrical and electronics

The electrical & electronics (E&E) industry is the leading sector in
Malaysia's manufacturing sector, contributing significantly to the country's
exports and employment. The E&E industry produces 13% of global back-end
semiconductors, driving 40% of the nation's export output and contributing
about 5.8% to the GDP in 2023. Malaysia benefits from the global demand in the
usage of mobile devices (smartphones, tablets), storage devices (cloud
computing, data centers), optoelectronics (photonics, fibre optics, LEDs) and
embedded technology (integrated circuits, PCBs, LEDs).

#### Electronic components

Products/activities which fall under this sub-sector include semiconductor
devices, passive components, printed circuits and other components such as
media, substrates and connectors.

Within the electronic components sub-sector, the semiconductor devices is the
leading contributor of exports for the E&E industry. Exports of semiconductor
devices were RM111.19 billion or 47% of the total E&E products exported in
2013.

Malaysia is a major hub for electrical component manufacturing, with factories
of international companies like Intel, AMD, Freescale Semiconductor, ASE,
Infineon, STMicroelectronics, Texas Instruments, Fairchild Semiconductor,
Renesas, X-Fab and major Malaysian-owned companies such as Green Packet,
Silterra, Globetronics, Unisem and Inari which have contributed to the steady
growth of the semiconductor industry in Malaysia. To date, there are more than
50 companies, largely MNCs producing semiconductors devices in Malaysia.

#### Photovoltaics

Malaysia is a major hub for solar equipment manufacturing, with factories of
companies like First Solar, Panasonic, TS Solartech, Jinko Solar, JA Solar,
SunPower, Hanwha Q Cells, and SunEdison in locations like Kulim, Penang,
Malacca, Cyberjaya and Ipoh.

First Solar's factory in Kulim

In 2013, Malaysia's total production capacity for solar wafers, solar cells
and solar panels totalled 4,042 MW. By 2014, Malaysia was the world's third
largest manufacturer of photovoltaics equipment, behind China and the European
Union.

Many international companies have the majority of production capacity located
in Malaysia, such as the American company First Solar which has over 2,000 MW
of production capacity located in Kulim and only 280 MW located in Ohio, and
formerly German-based Hanwha Q Cells which produces 1,100 MW worth of solar
cells in Cyberjaya while producing only 200 MW worth of solar cells in
Germany. SunPower's largest manufacturing facility with a capacity of 1,400 MW
is also located in Malacca.

### Automotive

The Proton Prevé, a car made by Malaysian car company Proton.

The automotive industry in Malaysia consists of 27 vehicle producers and over
640 component manufacturers. The Malaysian automotive industry is the third
largest in Southeast Asia, and the 23rd largest in the world, with an annual
production output of over 500,000 vehicles. The automotive industry
contributes 4% or RM 40 billion to Malaysia's GDP, and employs a workforce of
over 700,000 throughout a nationwide ecosystem.

The Malaysian automotive industry is Southeast Asia's sole pioneer of
indigenous car companies, namely Proton and Perodua. In 2002, Proton helped
Malaysia become the 11th country in the world with the capability to fully
design, engineer and manufacture cars from the ground up. The Malaysian
automotive industry also hosts several domestic-foreign joint venture
companies, which assemble a large variety of vehicles from imported complete
knock down (CKD) kits.

Malaysia's first tech unicorn startup, automotive e-commerce platform Carsome,
raised $290 million in a Series E funding round to expand its product,
technology and infrastructure in Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand. This latest
funding round values the used-car online marketplace at $1.7 billion.

### Construction

Penang Bridge

Malaysia has a large construction industry of over RM102.2 billion (US$32
billion). The highest percentage share was contributed by construction of non-
residential buildings which recorded 34.6 per cent. This was followed by civil
engineering sub-sector (30.6%), residential buildings (29.7%), and special
trades (5.1%).

Selangor recorded the highest value of construction work done at 24.5% among
the states, followed by Johor at 16.5%, Kuala Lumpur at 15.8%, Sarawak at 8.6%
and Penang at 6.4%. The contribution of these five states accounted for 71.8%
of the total value of construction work in Malaysia.

The expansion of the construction industry has been catalysed by major capital
expenditure projects, and a key factor has been the government's Economic
Transformation Programme (ETP) and public-private partnership (PPP) mega-
projects like Tun Razak Exchange, KVMRT and Iskandar Malaysia.

### Defence

A Kedah-class warship, with another unit being built in the background

Malaysia has a relatively new defence industry that was created after the
government created the Malaysia Defence Industry Council to encourage local
companies to participate in the country's defence sector in 1999.

The land sector of the defence industry is dominated by DefTech, a subsidiary
of Malaysia's largest automotive manufacturer, DRB-HICOM. The company focuses
on manufacturing armoured vehicles and specialised logistics vehicles. The
company has supplied ACV-15 infantry fighting vehicles to the Malaysian Army
in the past and is currently supplying the DefTech AV8 amphibious multirole
armoured vehicle to the Malaysian Army.

The sea sector of the defence industry is dominated by Boustead Heavy
Industries, who builds warships for the Royal Malaysian Navy (RMN) through
transfer of technology with foreign companies. The company has built 4 Kedah-
class offshore patrol vessels for the RMN in the past and is currently
undertaking a project to build 6 more Second Generation Patrol Vessels for the
RMN.

## Services sector

### Finance and banking

Headquarters of Maybank, Malaysia's largest bank

Kuala Lumpur has a large financial sector, and is ranked the 22nd in the world
in the Global Financial Centres Index. There are currently 27 commercial banks
(8 domestic and 19 foreign), 16 Islamic banks (10 domestic and 6 foreign), 15
investment banks (all domestic) and 2 other financial institutions (both
domestic) operating in Malaysia.

Commercial banks are the largest and most significant providers of funds in
the banking system. The largest banks in Malaysia's finance sector are
Maybank, CIMB, Public Bank Berhad, followed by RHB Bank, Hong Leong Bank and
AmBank.

Malaysia is currently also the world's largest centre of Islamic Finance.
Malaysia has 16 fully-fledged Islamic banks including five foreign ones, with
total Islamic bank assets of US$168.4 billion, which accounts for 25% of the
Malaysia's total banking assets. This in turn accounts for over 10% of the
world's total Islamic banking assets. In comparison, Malaysia's main rival
UAE, has US$95 billion of assets.

Malaysia is the global leader in terms of the sukuk (Islamic bond) market,
issuing RM62 billion (US$17.74 billion) worth of sukuk in 2014 - over 66.7% of
the global total of US$26.6 billion Malaysia also accounts for around two-
thirds of the global outstanding sukuk market, controlling $178 billion of
$290 billion, the global total.

The Malaysian government is planning to transform the country's capital Kuala
Lumpur into a major financial centre in a bid to raise its profile and spark
greater international trade and investment through the construction of the Tun
Razak Exchange (TRX). The government believes the project will allow Malaysia
to compete with regional financial superpowers such as Singapore and Hong
Kong, by leveraging on the country's established strength in the rapidly
growing Islamic financial marketplace.

Based in Kuala Lumpur, Bursa Malaysia serves as the country's sole national
stock exchange. Trading of shares started in 1960 and it is today one of the
largest bourses in Southeast Asia.

### Tourism

South Beach at Perhentian Besar

Tourism is a huge sector of the Malaysian economy, with 20.14 million tourists
generating RM71.3 billion (US$15.5 billion) in tourist receipts in 2023, Total
tourist receipts increased by 9% when compared to the 2013 figure of RM65.4
billion (US$20 billion).

Malaysia is ranked 14th of the most visited country in the world in 2024 at
26.1 million tourists.

Malaysia is rich with diverse natural attractions which become an asset to the
country's tourism industry. This was recognised by the World Travel & Tourism
Council (WTTC), who declared Malaysia as "a destination full of unrealised
potential" with the main strength as the availability of a vast range of
diverse attractions to suit all tastes relatively affordable prices and;
largely unspoilt destination.

Malaysia's top tourist destinations are the Mulu Caves, Perhentian Islands,
Langkawi, Petronas Towers and Mount Kinabalu.

#### Medical tourism

Tuaran Hospital in Sabah

Medical tourism is a significant sector of Malaysia's economy, with around
850,000 individuals travelling to Malaysia specifically for medical treatments
alone in 2022, contributing RM1.3 billion (US$295 million) in revenue to the
economy. This is down from pre-pandemic numbers of 1.2 million individuals and
a total contribution of RM1.7 billion (US$416 million) but the Malaysia
Healthcare Travel Council (MHTC) already expects the figures to surpass by
2024, with an expected revenue of RM2.4 billion (US$558 million).

Malaysia is reputed as one of the most preferred medical tourism destinations
with modern private healthcare facilities and highly efficient medical
professionals. In 2014, Malaysia was ranked the world's best destination for
medical tourism by the Nomad Capitalist. Malaysia was also included in the top
10 medical tourism destinations list by CNBC.

In 2014, Prince Court Medical Centre, a Malaysian hospital, was ranked the
world's best hospital for medical tourists by MTQUA. MHTC announced that two
Malaysian Hospitals were recognised in the Newsweek & Statista's World's Best
Hospitals 2024, Gleneagles Kuala Lumpur and Sunway Medical Centre.

### Oil and gas

Petronas petrol station in Thailand

Malaysia has a vibrant oil and gas industry. The national oil company,
Petronas was ranked 216th in the Fortune 500 list in 2022, generating revenue
of over RM171 billion (US$36.5 billion) and possessing total assets of over
RM798 billion (US$169 billion) in the first half of 2024. Petronas accounted
for more than 20% of the Malaysian government's revenue from 2018 to 2023. The
Malaysian government has been actively cutting down on its reliance of
petroleum with an expected contribution of approximately RM32 billion (around
US$7 billion) from Petronas and RM64 billion (US$13.9 billion) from petroleum-
derived revenues, with the latter figure down from RM69.8 billion (US$15.2
billion).

Petronas is also the custodian of oil and gas reserves for Malaysia. Hence,
all oil and gas activities are regulated by Petronas. Malaysia encourages
foreign oil company participation through production sharing contracts, in
which significant amount of oil will be given away to the foreign oil company
until it reaches a production milestone. Currently, many major oil companies
such as ExxonMobil, Royal Dutch Shell, Nippon Oil, and Murphy Oil are involved
in such contracts. As a result, 40% of oil fields in Malaysia are developed.

There are over 3,500 oil and gas (O&G) businesses in Malaysia comprising
international oil companies, independents, services and manufacturing
companies that support the needs of the O&G value chain both domestically and
regionally. Many major global machinery & equipment (M&E) manufacturers have
set up bases in Malaysia to complement home-grown M&E companies, while other
Malaysian oil and gas companies are focused on key strategic segments such as
marine, drilling, engineering, fabrication, offshore installation and
operations and maintenance (O&M).

## Infrastructure

Malaysia's infrastructure is one of the most developed in Asia. In 2016,
Malaysia was ranked 18th out of 140 countries in the World Economic Forum's
Global Competitiveness Report, the highest among of all developing economies
in Asia. Its telecommunications network is second only to Singapore's in
Southeast Asia, with 4.5 million fixed-broadband subscribers, 8.4 million
fixed-line subscribers and 50.1 million cellular subscribers in 2023. The
country has 7 international ports, the major one being the Port Klang. There
are 200 industrial parks along with specialised parks such as Technology Park
Malaysia and Kulim Hi-Tech Park. Fresh water is available to over 95% of the
population. During the colonial period, development was mainly concentrated in
economically powerful cities and in areas forming security concerns. Although
rural areas have been the focus of great development, they still lag behind
areas such as those in the west coast of Peninsular Malaysia. The
telecommunication network, although strong in urban areas, is less available
to the rural population.

### Energy

Bakun Dam under construction in 2009

Malaysia's energy infrastructure sector is largely dominated by Tenaga
Nasional, the largest electric utility company in Southeast Asia, with over
RM99.03 billion in assets. Customers are connected to electricity through the
National Grid, with more than 420 transmission substations in the Peninsular
linked together by approximately 11,000 km of transmission lines operating at
132, 275 and 500 kilovolts.

In 2013, Malaysia's total power generation capacity was over 29,728 MW. Total
electricity generation was 140,985.01 GWh and total electricity consumption
was 116,087.51 GWh.

Energy production in Malaysia is largely based on oil and natural gas, owing
to Malaysia's oil reserves and natural gas reserves, which is the fourth
largest in Asia-Pacific after China, India and Vietnam.

Malaysia has also significant renewable energy resources and has high
potential for the development of large-scale solar power and it has one of the
most advanced legal frameworks in the ASEAN region for promoting renewables.
The country set a 20% target of renewable energy in its energy mix by 2025 and
to achieve this the government will need to improve its renewable energy
governance, investment policy and market entry for foreign investors as well
to develop a framework for easier grid connection and use. As of 2021,
Malaysia is one of the major producers of solar panels for the international
market, but paradoxically it has yet to fully capitalize on this for domestic
electricity generation.

### Transport network

#### Road network

The North–South Expressway, the longest highway in Malaysia

Malaysia's road network is one of the most comprehensive in Asia and covers
approximately 280,000 kilometres (173,984 mi).

The main national road network is the Malaysian Federal Roads System, which
spans over 41,930 km (26,050 mi). Most of the federal roads in Malaysia are
2-lane roads. In town areas, federal roads may become 4-lane roads to
accommodate to increased traffic. Nearly all federal roads are paved with
tarmac except parts of the Skudai–Pontian Highway which is paved with
concrete, while parts of the Federal Highway linking Klang to Kuala Lumpur, is
paved with asphalt.

Malaysia has approximately 5,027 kilometres (3,124 mi) of highways and the
longest highway, the North–South Expressway, extends 772 kilometres (480 mi)
on the West Coast of Peninsular Malaysia, connecting major urban centres like
Kuala Lumpur and Johor Bahru. The Pan-Borneo Highway, which connects Sabah and
Sarawak on Borneo Island of East Malaysia, is undergoing a major upgrade to
dual carriageway since 2015. A total of 1,663 kilometres (1,033 mi) of the
road length is being reconstructed, bringing the standard of East Malaysian
highways to the same level of quality of Peninsular highways.

#### Rail network

There is currently more than 2,900 kilometres (1,800 mi) of railway in
Malaysia, 767 km (477 mi) are double tracked and electrified.

Rail transport in Malaysia comprises heavy rail (KTM), light rapid transit and
monorail (Rapid Rail), and a funicular railway line (Penang Hill Railway).
Heavy rail is mostly used for intercity passenger and freight transport as
well as some urban public transport, while LRTs are used for intra-city urban
public transport. There two commuter rail services linking Kuala Lumpur with
the Kuala Lumpur International Airport. The sole monorail line in the country
is also used for public transport in Kuala Lumpur, while the only funicular
railway line is in Penang. A rapid transit project, the KVMRT, is currently
under construction to improve Kuala Lumpur's public transport system.

The railway network covers most of the 11 states in Peninsular Malaysia. In
East Malaysia, only the state of Sabah has railways. The network is also
connected to the Thai railway 1,000 mm (3 ft 3+3⁄8 in) network in the north.
If the Burma Railway is rebuilt, services to Myanmar, India, and China could
be initiated.

#### Air network

Kuala Lumpur International Airport

Malaysia has 118 airports, of which 38 are paved. Most of the airports are
managed by Malaysia Airports Holdings Berhad (MAHB). The national airline is
Malaysia Airlines, providing international and domestic air services. Major
international routes and domestic routes crossing between West Malaysia and
East Malaysia are served by Malaysia Airlines and AirAsia while smaller
domestic routes are supplemented by smaller airlines like MASwings, Firefly
and Berjaya Air. Major cargo airlines include MASkargo and Transmile Air
Services.

Kuala Lumpur International Airport (KLIA) is the main and busiest airport of
Malaysia. In 2019, it was the world's 12th busiest airport by international
passenger traffic, recording over 44.8 million international passengers. In
2023, it was the world's 35th busiest airport by passenger traffic, recording
over 47.2 million passengers. As of 2024, KLIA is the second most connected
airport globally, following London Heathrow Airport and preceding Haneda
Airport in terms of international connectivity.

Other major airports include Kota Kinabalu International Airport, which is
also Malaysia's second busiest airport and busiest airport in East Malaysia
with over 9 million passengers in 2019, and Penang International Airport, with
approximately 6.8 million passengers in 2023.

#### Sea network

Port Klang

Malaysia is strategically located on the Strait of Malacca, one of the most
important shipping lanes in the world. Boasting a highly developed maritime
shipping sector, Malaysia has been ranked by UNCTAD as the fifth-best linked
country in the world, in terms of shipping trade route connectivity, better
than the developed economies of Germany and the Netherlands.

Malaysia has 2 ports that are listed in the top 20 busiest ports in the world,
Port Klang and Port of Tanjung Pelepas, which are respectively the second and
third busiest ports in Southeast Asia after the Port of Singapore.

Port Klang is Malaysia's busiest port, and the 12th busiest port in the world,
handling over 14 million TEUs. Port of Tanjung Pelepas is Malaysia's second
busiest port, and the 16th busiest port in the world, handling over 10.4
million TEUs.

## Free trade efforts

### International trade agreements

| This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. _( March 2021)__(Learn how
and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
Economy  | Agreement  | Abbreviation  | Concluded  | Signed  | Effective  | Legal Text   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Japan | Malaysia–Japan Economic Partnership Agreement  | MJEPA  | 13 December 2005  | 13 December 2005  | 13 July 2006  | [1] Archived 8 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
Pakistan | Malaysia–Pakistan Closer Economic Partnership Agreement  | MPCEPA  | 8 November 2007  | 8 November 2007  | 1 January 2008  | [2] Archived 7 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
New Zealand | Malaysia–New Zealand Free Trade Agreement  | MNZFTA  | 30 May 2009  | 26 October 2009  | 1 August 2010  | [3] Archived 26 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
India | Malaysia–India Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement  | MICECA  |  | 18 February 2011  | 1 July 2011  | [4] Archived 4 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
Chile | Malaysia–Chile Free Trade Agreement  | MCFTA  | May 2010  | 13 November 2010  | 25 February 2012  | [5] Archived 8 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
Australia | Malaysia–Australia Free Trade Agreement  | MAFTA  | 30 March 2012  |  | 1 January 2013  | [6] Archived 21 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
Turkey | Malaysia–Turkey Free Trade Agreement  | MTFTA  | 15 January 2014  | 17 April 2014  | 1 August 2015  | [7] Archived 24 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
China | ASEAN–China Free Trade Agreement  | ATFTA  |  | November 2002  | 1 January 2010  | [8] Archived 11 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
Japan | ASEAN–Japan Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement  | AJCEP  |  | 14 April 2008  | 1 February 2009  | [9] Archived 11 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
South Korea | ASEAN–Korea Free Trade Agreement  | AKFTA  |  |  | 1 January 2010  | [10] Archived 7 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
India | ASEAN–India Free Trade Agreement  | AIFTA  |  | 13 August 2009  | 1 January 2010  | [11] Archived 21 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
Australia  
New Zealand | ASEAN–Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area Agreement  | AANZFTA  |  | 27 February 2009  | 1 January 2010  | [12] Archived 17 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
Hong Kong | ASEAN–Hong Kong Free Trade Agreement  | AHKFTA  |  | 12 November 2017  | 13 October 2019  | [13] Archived 11 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine  
ASEAN  
China  
Japan  
South Korea  
Australia  
New Zealand | Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership | RCEP  |  | 15 November 2020  | 18 March 2022  | [14] Archived 26 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine  
  
### Trade agreements under negotiation

  * Malaysia-EFTA Economic Partnership Agreement since 2012
  * Malaysia–European Union Free Trade Agreement (MEUFTA)
  * Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (TPP)
  * Trade Prefential System-Organisation of Islamic Conference (TPS-OIC)
  * Developing Eight (D-8) Preferential Tariff Agreement (PTA)

## Investments

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( April 2022)_  
---|---  
  
Malaysia's total accumulated investments in 2014 was RM235.9 billion, with
72.6 per cent (RM171.3 billion) being contributed by domestic sources and 27.4
per cent (RM64.6 billion) coming from foreign sources.

According to A.T. Kearney, a global management consulting firm, Malaysia was
ranked 15th in the 2014 Foreign Direct Investment Confidence Index, 9th in
2012, 16th in 2007 and 21st in 2010. The index assesses the impact of
political, economic and regulatory changes on the FDI intentions and
preferences of the leaders of top companies around the world.

Rank  
2007 | Rank   
2010 | Rank   
2012 | Rank   
2014 | Country | FDI Confidence   
Index  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
3 | 2 | 4 | 1 |  United States | 2.16   
1 | 1 | 1 | 2 |  China | 1.95   
– | 9 | 20 | 3 |  Canada | 1.93   
4 | 10 | 8 | 4 |  United Kingdom | 1.91   
6 | 4 | 3 | 5 |  Brazil | 1.91   
10 | 5 | 5 | 6 |  Germany | 1.84   
5 | 3 | 2 | 7 |  India | 1.81   
11 | 7 | 6 | 8 |  Australia | 1.76   
7 | 24 | 7 | 9 |  Singapore | 1.75   
8 | 13 | 17 | 10 |  France | 1.74   
20 | 11 | 15 | 11 |  United Arab Emirates | 1.74   
19 | 8 | – | 12 |  Mexico | 1.72   
18 | – | 11 | 13 |  South Africa | 1.70   
– | – | 22 | 14 |  Switzerland | 1.68   
16 | 21 | 10 | 15 |  Malaysia | 1.65   
– | – | – | 16 |  Sweden | 1.64   
– | – | – | 17 |  Chile | 1.64   
- | – | 24 | 18 |  Spain | 1.63   
– | – | 21 | 19 |  Japan | 1.62   
– | – | – | 20 |  Italy | 1.61   
12 | – | 16 | 21 |  Belgium | 1.61   
6 | 6 | 23 | 22 |  Netherlands | 1.61   
– | – | 18 | 23 |  Denmark | 1.61   
13 | – | 19 | 24 |  Turkey | 1.60   
18 | 23 | 13 | 25 |  Indonesia | 1.60   
  
## Largest public Malaysian companies

### Fortune Global 500

Malaysia has 1 company that rank in the Fortune Global 500 ranking for 2022.

World Rank  | Company  | Industry  | Sales ($M)  | Profits ($M)  | Assets ($M)  | Employees   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
216  | Petronas | Oil and gas | 59,873  | 10,091  | 152,498  | 46,884   
  
### Forbes Global 2000

Malaysia has 8 companies that rank in the Forbes Global 2000 ranking for 2022.

World rank | Company | Industry | Sales   
(billion $) | Profits   
(billion $) | Assets   
(billion $) | Market value   
(billion $)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
485 | Maybank | Banking | 9.2 | 2.0 | 213.2 | 24.7   
837 | Tenaga Nasional | Utilities | 12.7 | 0.883 | 43.8 | 11.8   
751 | Public Bank Berhad | Banking | 4.5 | 1.4 | 111.1 | 21.2   
895 | CIMB Group Holdings | Banking | 5.7 | 1.0 | 149.3 | 12.2   
1525 | RHB Capital | Banking | 2.6 | 0.631 | 69.5 | 5.7   
1641 | Hong Leong Financial Group | Business services & supplies | 1.9 | 0.567 | 66.7 | 5.1   
1448 | Top Glove | Health care equipment & services | 3.6 | 1.6 | 3.1 | 10.8   
1236 | Petronas Chemicals | Chemicals | 5.6 | 1.8 | 11.5 | 19.1