| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Economy of Dominica" – news **·** newspapers **·** books
**·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( December 2020)__(Learn how and when to remove
this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy ofDominica** is reliant upon agriculture, particularly bananas,
with the financial services industry and citizenship by investment scheme
becoming increasingly the island's largest source of income. Banana production
employs, directly or indirectly, upwards of one-third of the work force. This
sector is highly vulnerable to weather conditions and to external events
affecting commodity prices. The value of banana exports fell to less than 25%
of merchandise trade earnings in 1998 compared to about 44% in 1994.

In view of the European Union's announced phase-out of preferred access of
bananas to its markets, agricultural diversification is a priority. Dominica
has made some progress, with the export of small quantities of citrus fruits
and vegetables and the introduction of coffee, patchouli, aloe vera, cut
flowers, and exotic fruits such as mangoes, guavas, and papayas. Dominica has
also had some success in increasing its manufactured exports, with soap as the
primary product. Dominica also recently entered the offshore financial
services market.

Because Dominica is mostly volcanic and has few beaches, development of
tourism has been slow compared with that on neighboring islands. Nevertheless,
Dominica's high, rugged mountains, rainforests, freshwater lakes, hot springs,
waterfalls, and diving spots make it an attractive destination. Cruise ship
stopovers have increased following the development of modern docking and
waterfront facilities in the capital. Eco-tourism also is a growing industry
on the island.

Dominica is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU). The
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) issues a common currency (the East
Caribbean dollar) to all eight members of the ECCU. The ECCB also manages
monetary policy, and regulates and supervises commercial banking activities in
its member countries. Dominica is a beneficiary of the U.S. Caribbean Basin
Initiative (CBI). Its 1996 exports to the U.S. were $7.7 million, and its U.S.
imports were $34 million. Dominica is also a member of the 15-member Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) and of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
(OECS).

## Primary industries

### Agriculture

About 22.6% of the total land area is arable. Agricultural production was on
the decline even before the 1979 hurricane disaster. The main crop of Dominica
is bananas, the output of which had fallen to 29,700 tons in 1978. As a result
of Hurricane David, production hit a low of 15,700 tons in 1979. Agriculture
suffered a further blow from Hurricane Allen in August 1980. However, after
outside financial support began to rehabilitate the sector, production rose to
27,800 tons in 1981 and totaled 30,000 tons in 1999. Additionally, there are
other products like citrus, coconuts, cocoa, herbal oils and extracts.

Agriculture accounts for about 20% of GDP and employs about 40% of the labor
force. Agricultural exports amounted to $19.1 million in 2001. Most crops are
produced on small farms, the 9,000 owners of which are banded together in
about 10 cooperatives; there are also several large farms that produce mostly
bananas for export. Other major crops are coconuts and citrus fruits which are
grown in commercial quantities. Production for 1999 included coconuts, 11,000
tons; grapefruit, 21,000 tons; lemons and limes, 1,000 tons; and oranges,
8,000 tons. Fruits and vegetables are produced mostly for local consumption.

### Animal husbandry

There are about 2,000 hectares (4,900 acres) of pasture land, comprising 2.7%
of the total land area. The island does not produce sufficient meat, poultry,
or eggs for local consumption so there are large imports of animal products.
In 2001 there were an estimated 540 head of cattle, 9,700 goats, 7,600 sheep,
and 5,000 hogs. In 2001, production of meat totaled 1,300 tons; and milk,
6,100 tons.

### Fishing

Before Hurricane David, some 2,000 persons earned a living fishing in coastal
waters, producing about 1,000 tons of fish a year and meeting only about one-
third of the local demand. The hurricane destroyed almost all of the island's
470 fishing boats; afterward, only about a dozen vessels could be
reconstructed for use. In 2000, the catch was 1,150 tons, up from 552 tons in
1991.

There is a relatively large fishing industry in Dominica, but it is not
modernized and almost exclusively serves the domestic market. A successful
experiment in fresh-water prawn farming, supported by Taiwanese aid, has
produced substantial amounts of prawns for the domestic and local markets.
Japan has provided support for a fish landing and processing plant in Roseau.

### Forestry

Dominica has the potential for a lumber industry. Some 46,000 hectares
(110,000 acres) are classified as forest, representing 61% of the total land
area. In 1962, Canadian experts produced a study indicating that over a
40-year period the island could produce a yearly output of 22,000 cu m
(800,000 cu ft) of lumber. Before Hurricane David, annual output had reached
about 7,500 cu m (265,000 cu ft). There are some 280 hectares (690 acres) of
government land allocated to commercial forestry and about 100 hectares (250
acres) of forestland in private hands. Commercially valuable woods include
mahogany, blue and red mahoe, and teak. Total imports of forest products in
2000 amounted to $10.3 million.

### Mining

Dominica's mining sector played a minor role in its economy. Pumice was the
major commodity extracted from the island for export, and Dominica produced
clay, limestone, volcanic ash, and sand and gravel, primarily for the
construction industry. There is some mining potential in Dominica, especially
in the island's northeast where there are believed to be deposits of copper.

## Secondary industries

Dominica's small manufacturing sector is almost entirely dependent on
agriculture, and the island has built up a handful of successful industries
specializing in soaps and other agricultural byproducts. The largest
manufacturer is Dominica Coconut Products, controlled by Colgate-Palmolive,
which produces soap from coconuts. The factory has an agreement to sell an
estimated 3 million bars of soap each year to Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines.
Dominican soap is also exported throughout the region, but has recently
encountered intensified competition from other regional producers, especially
in the important export markets of Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago.

There are four plants to process limes and other citrus fruits; two bottling
plants; two distilleries; four small apparel plants; and four small furniture
factories. Dominica exports water to its Caribbean neighbors; shoes, cement
blocks, furniture, and soap and toiletries are also exported. Home industries
produce some leather work, ceramics, and straw products.

Since the 1990s, the small manufacturing sector has been expanding at a modest
pace, including electronic assembly, rum, candles, and paints. The Trafalgar
Hydro Electric Power Station is now operational, making the island virtually
energy self-sufficient. Industry accounted for 23% of GDP in 2001.

Dominica has not yet been able to attract significant numbers of foreign
manufacturers, partly because its wage rates are relatively high and partly
because its infrastructure is not suited to high-volume manufacturing. Like
other islands, it seeks to attract investors with tax concessions and other
financial inducements, but several offshore manufacturing plants have closed
after their duty-free concessions expired, normally a 10-year span.

## Tertiary industries

### Tourism

**Tourism in Dominica** is mostly centered around Eco Tourism. It consists of
hiking, bird watching, canyoning, kayaking etc. Being the Nature Isle of the
Caribbean, it stands true to its name as there are numerous outdoor activities
based in nature. With the impact of COVID-19, the island has halted its
Carnival and Independence Celebrations since mid 2020, which are two of its
largest financial contributors in the tourism sector.

### Financial services

The Commonwealth of Dominica has become in recent years a major international
financial hub, and is quickly becoming one of the largest banking centres in
the world, and offshore services are also becoming its main source of income.
There are a number of service providers. These include global financial
institutions including Scotiabank, Royal Bank of Canada, First Caribbean
International Bank;

The largest Financial sectors are "offshore banking, payment processing
companies, and general corporate activities". Regulation and supervision of
the financial services industry is the responsibility of the Financial Service
Unit of the Commonwealth of Dominica (FSU) under the supervision of the
Ministry of Finance.

Starting in the mid-late 1990s, offshore financial centres, such as the
Commonwealth of Dominica, came under increasing pressure from the OECD for
their allegedly harmful tax regimes, where the OECD wished to prevent low-tax
regimes from having an advantage in the global marketplace. The OECD
threatened to place the Commonwealth of Dominica and other financial centres
on a "black list" and impose sanctions against them. However, the Commonwealth
of Dominica successfully avoided being placed on the OECD blacklist by
committing to regulatory reform to improve transparency and begin information
exchange with OECD member countries about their citizens.

Dominica has tried to expand its base by building up offshore financial
services. So far, a relatively small number of offshore banks and other
international business companies have registered in Dominica, but the
government is trying to attract more by making registration economical and
easy. A Dominica-based International Business Company (IBC) can, for instance,
be formed over the Internet, and the government has also granted operating
licenses to several Internet gambling companies.

## Facts at a glance

| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( July 2019)_  
---|---  
  
**GDP:** purchasing power parity - $485 million (2006 est.)

**GDP - real growth rate:** 3.2% (2007 est.)

**GDP - per capita:** purchasing power parity - $3,800 (2005 est.)

**GDP - composition by sector:**  
_agriculture:_ 17.7%  
_industry:_ 32.8%  
_services:_ 49.5% (2004 est.)

**Population below poverty line:** 29% (2009 est.)

**Household income or consumption by percentage share:**  
_lowest 10%:_ NA%  
_highest 10%:_ NA%

**Inflation rate (consumer prices):** -0.1% (2005 est.)

**Labor force:** 25,000 (2000 est.)

**Labor force - by occupation:**  
_agriculture:_ 40%  
_industry:_ 32%  
_services:_ 28% (2000 est.)

**Unemployment rate:** 23% (2003 est.)

**Budget:**  
_revenues:_ $73.9 million  
_expenditures:_ $84.4 million (2001)

**Industries:** soap, coconut oil, tourism, copra, furniture, cement blocks,
shoes

**Industrial production growth rate:** -10% (1997 est.)

**Electricity - production:** 80 million kWh (2005)

**Electricity - production by source:**  
_fossil fuel:_ 50%  
_hydro:_ 50%  
_nuclear:_ 0%  
_other:_ 0% (1998)

**Electricity - consumption:** 74.4 million kWh (2005)

**Electricity - exports:** 0 kWh (2005)

**Electricity - imports:** 0 kWh (2005)

**Agriculture - products:** bananas, citrus, mangoes, root crops, coconuts,
cocoa; forest and fishery potential not exploited

**Exports:** $94 million f.o.b. (2006)

**Exports - commodities:** bananas 50%, soap, bay oil, vegetables, grapefruit,
oranges

**Exports - partners:** United Kingdom 24.8%, Jamaica 12.3%, Antigua and
Barbuda 9.8%, Guyana 8.3%, China 7.9%, Trinidad and Tobago 5.4%, Saint Lucia
4.5% (2006)

**Imports:** $296 million f.o.b. (2006)

**Imports - commodities:** manufactured goods, machinery and equipment, food,
chemicals

**Imports - partners:** United States 25.3%, China 22.7%, Trinidad and Tobago
13.8%, South Korea 4.8% (2006)

**Debt - external:** $213 million (2004)

**Economic aid - recipient:** $15.17 million (2005 est.)

**Currency:** 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

**Exchange rates:** East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7 (2007), 2.7
(2006), 2.7 (2005), 2.7 (2004), 2.7 (2003)

**Fiscal year:** 1 July - 30 June