| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( November 2024)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy of Burkina Faso** is based primarily on subsistence farming and
livestock raising. Burkina Faso has an average income purchasing-power-parity
per capita of $1,900 and nominal per capita of $790 in 2014. More than 80% of
the population relies on subsistence agriculture with only a small fraction
directly involved in industry and services. Highly variable rainfall, poor
soils, lack of adequate communications and other infrastructure, a low
literacy rate, and a stagnant economy are all longstanding problems of this
landlocked country. The export economy also remained subject to fluctuations
in world prices.

The country has a high population density, few natural resources, and a
fragile soil. Industry remains dominated by unprofitable government-controlled
corporations.[_citation needed_] Following the African franc currency
devaluation in January 1994 the government updated its development program in
conjunction with international agencies, and exports and economic growth have
increased. Maintenance of its macroeconomic progress depends on continued low
inflation, reduction in the trade deficit, and reforms designed to encourage
private investment.

The Burkinabé financial system represents 30% of the country's GDP and is
dominated by the banking sector, which accounts for 90% of total financial
system assets. Eleven banks and five non-bank financial institutions operate
in the country.

The banking sector is highly concentrated, with the three largest banks
holding nearly 60% of total financial sector assets. Banks are generally
adequately capitalized, but remain vulnerable due to their overexposure to the
cotton sector, the prices of which are subject to significant oscillations.

A December 2018 report from the World Bank indicates that cotton had become
the most important cash crop, while gold exports were increasing in recent
years. In 2017, economic growth increased to 6.4% in 2017 (vs. 5.9% in 2016)
primarily due to gold production and increased investment in infrastructure.
The increase in consumption linked to growth of the wage bill also supported
economic growth. Inflation remained low, 0.4% that year but the public deficit
grew to 7.7% of GDP (vs. 3.5% in 2016). The government was continuing to get
financial aid and loans to finance the debt. To finance the public deficit,
the Government combined concessional aid and borrowing on the regional market.
The World Bank said that the economic outlook remained favorable in the short
and medium term, although that could be negatively impacted. Risks included
high oil prices (imports), lower prices of gold and cotton (exports) as well
as terrorist threat and labour strikes.

## Macro-economic trend

Gross Domestic Product of Burkina Faso at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of CFA Francs.  Year | Gross Domestic Product | US Dollar Exchange | Inflation Index (2000=100)   
---|---|---|---  
1980 | 412,240 | 211.29 CFA Francs | 45   
1985 | 642,387 | 449.22 CFA Francs | 67   
1990 | 848,910 | 272.26 CFA Francs | 65   
1995 | 1,330,159 | 499.12 CFA Francs | 88   
2000 | 1,861,522 | 711.86 CFA Francs | 100   
2005 | 3,027,196 | 526.56 CFA Francs | 115   
  
For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US Dollar is exchanged at 470.70
CFA Francs only. Mean wages were $0.56 per man-hour in 2009.

Burkinabé exports in 2006

Current GDP per capita of Burkina Faso grew 13% in the Sixties reaching a peak
growth of 237% in the Seventies. But this proved unsustainable and growth
consequently scaled back to 23% in the Eighties. Finally, it shrank by 37% in
the Nineties. Average wages in 2007 hover around 2 to 3 dollars per day.

Although disadvantaged by an extremely resource-deprived domestic economy,
Burkina Faso remains committed to the structural adjustment program it
launched in 1991. It has largely recovered from the devaluation of the CFA in
January 1994, with a 1996 growth rate of 5.9%.

Many Burkinabé migrate to neighbouring countries for work, and their
remittances provide a substantial contribution to the balance of payments.
Burkina Faso is attempting to improve the economy by developing its mineral
resources, improving its infrastructure, making its agricultural and livestock
sectors more productive and competitive, and stabilizing the supplies and
prices of cereals.

The agricultural economy remains highly vulnerable to fluctuations in
rainfall. The Mossi Plateau in north central Burkina Faso faces encroachment
from the Sahara. The resultant southward migration means heightened
competition for control of very limited water resources south of the Mossi
Plateau. Most of the population ekes out a living as subsistence farmers,
living with problems of climate, soil erosion, and rudimentary technology. The
staple crops are pearl millet, sorghum, maize, and rice. The cash crops are
cotton, groundnuts, karite (shea nuts), and sesame. Livestock, once a major
export, has declined.

A 2018 report by the African Development Bank Group discussed a macroeconomic
evolution: "higher investment and continued spending on social services and
security that will add to the budget deficit". This group's prediction for
2018 indicated that the budget deficit would be reduced to 4.8% of GDP in 2018
and to 2.9% in 2019. Public debt associated with the National Economic and
Social Development Plan was estimated at 36.9% of GDP in 2017.

## Agriculture

Burkina Faso produced in 2018:

  * 1.9 million tons of sorghum;
  * 1.7 million tons of maize;
  * 1.1 million tons of millet;
  * 630 thousand tons of cowpea (3rd largest producer in the world, preceded only by Niger and Nigeria);
  * 490 thousand tons of sugar cane;
  * 482 thousand tons of cotton;
  * 329 thousand tons of peanut;
  * 253 thousand tons of sesame seed (8th largest producer in the world);
  * 240 thousand tons of vegetable;
  * 160 thousand tons of rice;
  * 103 thousand tons of cashew nuts (12th largest producer in the world);

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

### External trade

Industry, still in an embryonic stage, is located primarily in Bobo-Dioulasso,
Ouagadougou, Banfora, and Koudougou. Manufacturing is limited to food
processing, textiles, and other import substitution heavily protected by
tariffs. Some factories are privately owned, and others are set to be
privatized. Burkina Faso's exploitable natural resources are limited, although
a manganese ore deposit is located in the remote northeast. Gold mining has
increased greatly since the mid-1980s and, along with cotton, is a leading
export moneyearner. However, both gold and cotton are listed as goods produced
mostly by child labor and forced labor according to a recent U.S. Department
of Labor report.

## Child labour

According to the United States Department of Labor in 2012, 37.8% of children
in Burkina Faso aged 5-14 were working, while another 13.6% were both going to
school and working.

Children working in granite quarries and gold mines were working 6 to 7 days a
week for up to 14 hours per day. So-called "payment" is in the form of food to
eat and a place to sleep. Since that time, the government has adopted a
National Action Plan, and in collaboration with Interpol, have since have
rescued many children from child trafficking.

By 2023, the percentage of children working in Burkina Faso had dropped
slightly to 35.7%, according to the United States' Department of Labor.

Christian Children's Fund of Canada (CCFC) has partnered with EDUCO, a fellow
member of the ChildFund Alliance, to implement a European Union-funded project
in north Burkina to prevent children from working in mines.