| This article needs to be **updated**. The reason given is: The information
in this article is outdated since the Russian invasion of Ukraine where its
economy has significantly deteriorated. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( December 2024)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy of Ukraine** is a developing, upper-middle income, mixed
economy. It grew rapidly from 2000 until the 2008–2009 Ukrainian financial
crisis. The economy recovered in 2010 and continued improving until 2013. The
Russian incursion in Ukraine caused a severe economic decline from 2014 to
2015, with the country's gross domestic product in 2015 barely surpassing half
of what it was in 2013. In 2016, the economy again started to grow. By 2018,
the Ukrainian economy was growing rapidly, and reached almost 80% of its size
in 2008.

The depression during the 1990s included hyperinflation and a fall in economic
output to less than half of the GDP of the preceding Ukrainian SSR. GDP growth
was recorded for the first time in 2000, and continued for eight years. This
growth was halted by the 2008 financial crisis. The Ukrainian economy
recovered and achieved positive GDP growth in the first quarter of 2010. In
the early 2010s, Ukraine was noted as possessing many of the components of a
major European economy, such as rich farmlands, a well-developed industrial
base, highly trained labour, and a good education system. It also has
important mineral resources.

In October 2013, the Ukrainian economy lapsed into a recession. The previous
summer, Ukrainian exports to Russia substantially declined due to stricter
border and customs control by Russia. The early 2014 annexation of Crimea by
Russia, and the war in Donbas that started in the spring of 2014 severely
damaged Ukraine's economy and two of Ukraine's most industrial regions. In
2013, Ukraine saw zero GDP growth. Ukraine's economy shrank by 6.8% in 2014,
and this continued with a 12% decline in GDP in 2015. In April 2017, the World
Bank stated that Ukraine's economic growth rate was 2.3% in 2016, ending the
recession. Despite these improvements, Ukraine remains one of the poorest
countries in Europe, which some have attributed to high corruption levels and
the slow pace of economic liberalisation and institutional reform. The Russian
Invasion of Ukraine in 2022 further deteriorated the country's economy.

## History

### Before 1917

Geography has long influenced the economy of the Ukrainian lands. Rich fertile
soils (such as chernozem areas) made the area a "breadbasket": for ancient
Greece as well as for early modern Europe. The maintenance of trade corridors
– the route from the Varangians to the Greeks and access through the Straits
to the Mediterranean world – became important. Mineral resources encouraged
industrialisation – notably in the Donbas – from the 19th century onwards.

The lack of secure borders meant repeated interruptions in economic
development. Steppe nomads and other conquerors – Cumans, Mongols, Tatars for
example, sometimes saw plundering as more important than fostering economic
development. In the 16th to 18th centuries, the wastelands of the Wild Fields
left much of Ukraine as an area of tentatively militarised outposts, prior to
tsarist Russia's extension of its power into the region in the 17th and 18th
centuries.

### Soviet period: 1917 to 1991

### 1991 to 2000

On 24 August 1991, Ukraine established its independence from the Soviet Union.
The new state's economy suffered huge output declines and soaring inflation in
the following years. Ukraine saw hyperinflation in the early 1990s because of
a lack of access to financial markets and massive monetary expansion to
finance government spending, while output declined sharply this was
catastrophic for the economy because it undid decades of hard-fought economic
progress and people became poorer. Huge output declines and soaring inflation
was at the time common to most former Soviet republics, but Ukraine was among
the hardest hit by these problems.

In response to hyperinflation the National Bank of Ukraine replaced the
national currency, the karbovanets, with the hryvnia in September 1996 and
pledged to keep it stable in relation to the U.S. dollar. The currency
remained unstable through the late 1990s, particularly during the 1998 Russian
financial crisis.

Deep recession during the 1990s led to a relatively high poverty rate, but
beginning in 2001, seven straight years of economic growth, raised the living
standard for most citizens. A World Bank report in 2007 noted that: "Ukraine
recorded one of the sharpest declines in poverty of any transition economy in
recent years. The poverty rate, measured against an absolute poverty line,
fell from a high of 32% in 2001 to 8% in 2005." The UN noted that Ukraine had
overcome absolute poverty, and that there was only relative poverty in 2009.

### 2000 to 2014

Ukraine stabilised by the early 2000s. The year 2000 saw the first year of
economic growth since Ukraine's independence. The economy continued to grow
thanks to a 50% growth in exports between 2000 and 2008 – mainly exports from
the traditional industries of metals, metallurgy, engineering, chemicals, and
food. Between 2001 and 2008, metals and chemicals prices boomed because of
fast international economic growth, while the price of natural gas imported
from Russia remained low.

Monetisation also helped to drive the economic boom Ukraine experienced
between 2000 and 2008. Attracted in part by relatively high interest-rates,
foreign cash was injected into Ukraine's economy and money supply grew
rapidly: from 2001 to 2010 broad, money increased at an annual rate of 35%. In
2006 and 2007, credit growth averaged 73%.

An effect of this was that Ukrainian assets began to look like a large
economic bubble and high inflation started to damage Ukraine's export
competitiveness. The ratio of credit to GDP grew extremely fast – from 7% to
almost 80% over just several[_quantify_] years. From 2000 to 2007, Ukraine's
real growth averaged 7.4%. This growth was driven by domestic demand:
orientation toward consumption, other structural change, and financial
development.

Domestic demand grew in constant prices by almost 15% annually. It was
supported by expansionary—procyclical—fiscal policy. Ukraine benefited from
very low labour costs, slightly lower tariffs, and high prices of its main
export goods, but at the same time faced notably higher non-tariff barriers.
Russia has not charged Ukraine below-world-market prices for natural gas since
the end of 2008. This led to various Russia–Ukraine gas disputes.

Ukraine suffered severely in the economic crisis of 2008. Because of it
Ukraine experienced a drought in capital flows. The hryvnia, which had been
pegged at a rate of 5:1 to the U.S. dollar, was devalued to 8:1, and was
stabilised at that ratio until the beginning of 2014. In 2008, Ukraine's
economy ranked 45th in the world according to GDP (nominal), with a total
nominal GDP of US$188 billion, and nominal per capita GDP of US$3,900. There
was 3% unemployment at the end of 2008. Over the first 9 months of 2009,
unemployment averaged 9.4%. The final official unemployment rates for 2009 and
2010 were 8.8% and 8.4%, although the CIA World Factbook notes a "large number
of unregistered or underemployed workers". Ukraine's GDP fell by 15% in 2009.

The Ukrainian economy recovered in the first quarter of 2010 due to the
recovery of the world economy and increasing prices for metals. Ukraine's real
GDP growth in 2010 was 4.3%, leading to a per capita PPP GDP of US$6,700. In
2011, Ukrainian politicians estimated that 40% of Ukraine's economy was a
shadow economy.

In the summer of 2013, Ukrainian exports to Russia fell substantially due to
Russia's stricter customs controls.

By October 2013, the Ukrainian economy had become stuck in recession. Moody's
downgraded Ukraine's credit rating to Caa1 (poor quality and very high credit
risk) in September 2013. At the time, swap markets rated Ukraine's default
probability over the next five years at 50%. In 2013, Ukraine saw no growth in
GDP.

### Post-Euromaidan: 2014 to present

Due to the loss of Ukraine's largest trading partner, Russia, over the
annexation of Crimea in March 2014, and exacerbated by the war in Donbas which
started in April 2014 Ukraine's economy shrank by 6.8% in 2014. It had been
expected to decline by 8%. A Ukrainian government report stated early in
February 2016 that Ukraine's economy had shrunk by 10.4% in 2015. For 2015,
the National Bank of Ukraine had expected a further decline of 11.6%, and the
World Bank anticipated a 12% shrinkage. The World Bank forecast growth of 1%
in 2016.

Early in February 2014, the National Bank of Ukraine changed the hryvnia into
a fluctuating/floating currency in an attempt to meet IMF requirements and to
try to enforce a stable price for the currency in the Forex market. In 2014
and 2015, the hryvnia lost about 70% of its value against the U.S. dollar.

The IMF agreed to a four-year loan programme worth about $17.5 billion in
eight tranches over 2015 and 2016, subject to conditions which involved
economic reforms. However, due to lack of progress on reforms, only two
tranches worth $6.7 billion were paid in 2015. A third tranche of $1.7 billion
was provisionally scheduled in June 2016 subject to the bringing into law of
19 further reform measures. Some western analysts believed that large foreign
loans were not encouraging reform, but enabling the corrupt extraction of
funds out of the country.

Since December 2015, Ukraine has refused to pay and hence _de facto_ defaults
on a $3 billion debt payment to Russia that formed part of a December 2013
Ukrainian–Russian action plan.

The turnover of retail trade in Ukraine in 2014 shrank by 8.6% (from 2013) and
shrank by 20.7% in 2015 (from 2014). Ukraine saw a 30.9% decline in exports in
2015, mainly because of a sharp decline in production output in Donetsk Oblast
and in Luhansk Oblast (the two regions of the Donbas). These two regions were
responsible for 40.6% of the total export-decline rate. Before the war they
had been two of the more industrial oblasts of Ukraine.

According to the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, Ukraine had a
surplus in its balance of payments in January–November 2015 of $566 million
and has had a trade deficit of $11.046 billion during the same period in 2014.
On 31 December 2015, Ukraine's public debt stood at 79% of its GDP. It had
shrunk $4.324 billion in 2015 to end up at $65.488 billion. But calculated in
hryvnia, the debt had grown by 42.78%. In 2015, the Ministry of Social Policy
of Ukraine rated 20–25% of Ukrainian households as poor.

$2.526 billion entered the Ukrainian economy via remittances in 2015, 34.9%
less than in 2014. $431 million was sent from Ukraine to elsewhere using
remittances. In January 2016, Bloomberg rated Ukraine's economy as the 41st
most innovative in the world, down from 33rd in January 2015.

In May 2016, the IMF mission chief for Ukraine, Ron van Rood, stated that
reduction of corruption was a key test for continued international support. In
February 2016, historian Andrew Wilson assessed progress in reducing
corruption as poor as of 2016. Aivaras Abromavičius, Ukraine's then-Minister
of Economy and Trade, resigned in February 2016, citing ingrained corruption.
In October of the same year, a survey of potential foreign investors conducted
by Dragon Capital identified corruption and lack of trust in the judiciary as
the largest obstacles to investment.

Late in July 2016, the State Statistics Service of Ukraine reported that,
compared with June 2015, real wages had increased by 17.3%. Simultaneously the
National Bank of Ukraine reported a $406 million surplus in Ukraine's
January–June 2016 balance of payments against a deficit of $1.3 billion in the
same period in 2015. According to Ukraine's State Statistics Service,
inflation in 2016 came down to 13.9%; while it had stood at 43.3% in 2015 and
at 24.9% in 2014.

_The Economist_ has compared the severity of Ukraine's recession to that of
the Greek recession in 2011–2012 – pointing to Ukraine experiencing an 8–9%
decline in GDP from 2014 to 2015 and Greece experiencing an 8.1% decline of
GDP in 2011–2012, and noted that not all areas of Ukraine were equally
effected by the economic downturn. Donetsk and Luhansk (the conflict zone) saw
industrial production falling by 32% and 42% respectively. On the other hand,
Lviv, located over 1000 km from the conflict, posted the largest jump in
employment in the nation.

The economy of Ukraine has overcome[_when?_] the severe crisis caused by armed
conflict in the eastern part of country. A 200% devaluation of the hryvnia in
2014–2015 made Ukrainian goods and services cheaper and more competitive. In
2016, for the first time since 2010, the economy grew by more than 2%. A 2017
World Bank statement projected growth of 2% in 2017, of 3.5% in 2018, and of
4% in 2019 and 2020. Inflation in Ukraine in 2017 was 13.7% (12.4% in 2016).

Since about 2015, there has been a growing number of Ukrainians working in the
European Union, particularly Poland. Eurostat reported that 662,000 Ukrainians
received EU residence permits in 2017, with 585,439 issued by Poland. The head
of the National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine has estimated that up
to 9 million Ukrainians work abroad for some part of the year, and 3.2 million
have regular full-time work abroad with most not planning to return. World
Bank statistics show that money remittances back to Ukraine have roughly
doubled from 2015 to 2018, worth about 4% of GDP.

In Q1 2019, China became Ukraine's largest trading partner, replacing Russia.
In Q3 of 2019, real GDP grew by 4.2%. The main driving factors include:
increased purchasing power of the population in conditions of increase of the
level of wages (during nine months of 2019 real wages increased by 9.5%); high
level of business activity and preservation of investment activity, which
stimulated mainly the development of construction, in particular, of
industrial and transport infrastructure facilities; active consumer lending;
maintaining the high dynamics of agricultural development; favourable price
situation on selected world commodity markets for domestic exports and others.
Ukraine made its largest payment on debt in 2019 at $1.1 billion.

In 2019, Fitch Ratings, a global leader in credit ratings and research,
upgraded Ukraine's Long-Term foreign and National Currency Issuer Default
Ratings (IDR) from "B−" to "B" and improved the outlook on the credit rating
from stable to positive. Ukraine has demonstrated timely access to fiscal and
external financing, improving macroeconomic stability, and declining public
indebtedness.

Ukraine moved up seven positions in the annual World Bank Doing Business 2020
report. Prudent macroeconomic management helped reduce inflation and interest
rates in 2019. Inflation eased to 4.1% at the end of 2019 and 2.4% in February
2020.[_citation needed_]

In 2020, Ukraine's GDP fell by 4.4%, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On 27
October 2020, the Constitutional Court of Ukraine ruled that anti-corruption
legislation, including the mandatory electronic declaration of income, was
unconstitutional. President Volodymyr Zelenskyy warned that if the Ukrainian
parliament did not restore these anti-corruption laws, foreign aid, loans and
visa-free travel to the European Union were at risk. The governor of the
National Bank of Ukraine reported that Ukraine will not receive the scheduled
$700 million IMF load before the end of 2020 because of the issue. IMF
assessment teams had not visited Kyiv for eight months, which is necessary for
further IMF loan tranches to be released. In February 2021, economist Anders
Åslund wrote "for months, senior Ukrainian officials have been claiming that
the Ukrainian government has done everything the [IMF] could possibly demand"
but "this happy talk was always detached from reality", and the relationship
with the IMF remains critical.

On 21 July 2022, Ukraine devalued the Ukrainian hryvnia by 25% against the
U.S. dollar due to the economic impact of ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine,
to eliminate currency speculation and to improve the international
competitiveness of business. The previous day it requested a two-year payment
freeze on international bonds; in 2020 it had $130 billion of external debt.
When the 2022 Russian invasion began, Ukraine's economy was predicted by the
IMF to shrink by up to 35%.

Despite improvements, as in Moldova corruption in Ukraine remains an obstacle
to joining the EU; the country was rated 104th out of 180 in the Corruption
Perceptions Index for 2023.

## Economic data

Ukraine is subdivided into nine economic regions: Carpathian, Northwestern,
Podillia, Capital, Central-Ukrainian, Northeastern, Black-Sea-Coastal, Trans-
Dnipro, and Donetsk. Those regions were redrawn from the three Soviet economic
regions of the Ukrainian SSR: Donetsk-TransDnieper, Southwestern, and
Southern.

### Main economic indicators

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1992–2023. Inflation
below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP  
(in bn. US$PPP) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ PPP) | GDP  
(in bn. US$nominal) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ nominal) | GDP growth  
(real) | Inflation rate  
(in %) | Unemployment  
(in %) | Government debt  
(in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1992  | 331.1  | 6,382.7  | 22.2  | 427.9  | n/a  | n/a  | n/a  | n/a   
1993  | 290.8  | 5,623.0  | 35.0  | 677.3  | -14.2%  | 4734.9%  | n/a  | n/a   
1994  | 229.0  | 4,463.7  | 38.0  | 741.0  | -22.9%  | 891.2%  | n/a  | n/a   
1995  | 205.3  | 4,034.9  | 38.3  | 752.3  | -12.2%  | 376.7%  | 14.8%  | n/a   
1996  | 188.1  | 3,732.6  | 46.1  | 914.3  | -10.0%  | 80.2%  | 10.0%  | n/a   
1997  | 185.6  | 3,714.5  | 51.9  | 1,037.9  | -3.0%  | 15.9%  | 9.8%  | 28.9%   
1998  | 184.2  | 3,716.9  | 43.3  | 874.3  | -1.9%  | 10.6%  | 11.3%  | 46.5%   
1999  | 186.4  | 3,794.6  | 32.7  | 665.0  | -0.2%  | 22.7%  | 11.9%  | 59.0%   
2000  | 201.8  | 4,147.7  | 32.3  | 664.4  | 5.9%  | 28.2%  | 11.5%  | 43.8%   
2001  | 224.5  | 4,654.7  | 37.9  | 784.9  | 8.8%  | 12.0%  | 10.8%  | 36.7%   
2002  | 240.1  | 5,021.3  | 42.3  | 885.3  | 5.3%  | 0.8%  | 9.6%  | 33.6%   
2003  | 268.1  | 5,651.9  | 50.1  | 1,055.9  | 9.5%  | 5.2%  | 9.1%  | 29.4%   
2004  | 307.8  | 6,535.5  | 64.8  | 1,374.8  | 11.8%  | 9.0%  | 8.6%  | 24.8%   
2005  | 327.3  | 7,001.6  | 86.0  | 1,839.5  | 3.1%  | 13.5%  | 7.2%  | 17.7%   
2006  | 363.1  | 7,813.6  | 107.8  | 2,319.3  | 7.6%  | 9.1%  | 6.8%  | 14.8%   
2007  | 403.5  | 8,734.2  | 143.3  | 3,101.4  | 8.2%  | 12.8%  | 6.4%  | 12.3%   
2008  | 420.2  | 9,142.8  | 181.3  | 3,944.7  | 2.2%  | 25.2%  | 6.4%  | 20.4%   
2009  | 359.1  | 7,842.9  | 117.1  | 2,557.3  | -15.1%  | 15.9%  | 8.8%  | 35.4%   
2010  | 378.3  | 8,296.0  | 136.0  | 2,982.8  | 4.1%  | 9.4%  | 8.1%  | 40.6%   
2011  | 407.2  | 8,959.2  | 163.2  | 3,589.6  | 5.5%  | 8.0%  | 7.9%  | 36.9%   
2012  | 426.0  | 9,388.8  | 175.7  | 3,872.5  | 0.2%  | 0.6%  | 7.5%  | 37.5%   
2013  | 486.4  | 10,749.4  | 179.6  | 3,968.9  | 0%  | -0.3%  | 7.2%  | 40.5%   
2014  | 462.0  | 10,804.3  | 130.6  | 3,053.6  | -6.6%  | 12.1%  | 9.3%  | 70.3%   
2015  | 435.5  | 10,224.9  | 90.5  | 2,124.3  | -9.8%  | 48.7%  | 9.1%  | 79.5%   
2016  | 475.7  | 11,215.9  | 93.3  | 2,200.0  | 2.4%  | 13.9%  | 9.5%  | 79.5%   
2017  | 504.2  | 11,942.8  | 112.1  | 2,655.7  | 2.4%  | 14.4%  | 9.7%  | 71.6%   
2018  | 534.2  | 12,725.0  | 130.9  | 3,118.3  | 3.5%  | 10.9%  | 9.0%  | 60.4%   
2019  | 561.2  | 13,447.4  | 154.0  | 3,690.1  | 3.2%  | 7.9%  | 8.5%  | 50.5%   
2020  | 547.3  | 13,213.6  | 156.6  | 3,780.1  | -3.7%  | 2.7%  | 9.2%  | 60.5%   
2021  | 591.5  | 14,427.9  | 199.8  | 4,874.3  | 3.4%  | 9.4%  | 9.8%  | 48.9%   
2022  | 449.0  | 12,886.2  | 160.5  | 4,606.8  | -29.1%  | 20.2%  | 24.5%  | 78.5%   
2023  | 474.8  | 14,304.9  | 173.4  | 5,224.6  | 2.0%  | 17.7%  | 19.4%  | 88.2%   
  
### Trade

Until recently, Russia was Ukraine's largest trading partner with 25.7% of
exports and 32.4% of imports in 2012. In 2012, 24.9% of exports and 30.9% of
imports were to and from the EU. In 2013, 35.9% of Ukrainian exports went to
CIS countries, including eight countries other than Ukraine. Simultaneously,
exports to EU countries was 26.6% of all exports.

In 2015 the EU became Ukraine's largest trading partner, accounting for more
than a third of its trade. In 2015, Ukrainian exports to Russia had fallen to
12.7%. In 2017, 14.5% of Ukraine's imports came from Russia. In 2017,
Ukrainian exports to Russia stood at 9%. In 2017, 40% of Ukraine's exports
went to the EU and 15% to CIS countries. Overall, Ukraine increased its
exports by 20% in 2017. The growth of imports was faster than the rate of
export growth.

In 2015, food and other agricultural products (worth $13 billion), metallurgy
($8.8 billion) and machinery ($4.1 billion) made up most of Ukraine's exports,
with trade partners in 217 countries. Exports from Ukraine in 2015 decreased
by 29.3% to $38.135 billion. Imports were 31.1% down, to $37.502 billion. In
2017 almost half of Ukraine's exports were provided by the agrarian complex
and food industry, slightly more than 20% by metallurgy and nearly 10% by
machine building products.

In 2019, China replaced Russia as the largest single-nation trading partner
with Ukraine achieved $50.06 billion in export and $60.78 billion in import.
Ukraine was the leading agricultural goods provider in the Chinese market.

Natural gas is Ukraine's biggest import and the main cause of the country's
structural trade deficit.

Exports of Ukrainian goods in 2024 reached US$41.73 billion.

### List of major private owned companies, not considering banks and insurance
companies

Rank  | Company  | Home city  | Revenue (₴M), 2020  | Profit (₴M), 2020   
---|---|---|---|---  
1. | Metinvest | Mariupol | 309,302 | 12,960   
2. | ATB-Market | Dnipro | 123,864 | 5,769   
3. | Kernel | Kyiv | 118,667 | 5,553   
4. | DTEK | Kyiv | 116,046 | −13,895   
5. | Fozzy Group | Kyiv | 80,167 | n/d   
6. | ArcelorMittal Kryvyi Rih | Kryvyi Rih | 63,497 | 741   
7. | Tedis Ukraine | Odesa | 54,845 | 244   
8. | Mironivsky Hliboproduct | Kyiv | 51,516 | −3,547   
9. | Epicentr K | Kyiv | 50,382 | 3,171   
10. | Ferrexpo | Horishni Plavni | 45,828 | 17,118   
11. | Zaporizhstal | Zaporizhzhia | 45,631 | −3,678   
12. | BaDM | Lviv | 41,816 | 1,112   
13. | Optima-Pharm | Kyiv | 37,248 | 338   
14. | Ukrnafta | Kyiv | 35,535 | 4,269   
15. | Ukrtatnafta | Kremenchuk | 34,327 | 42   
  
Source:

The 2016 Ranking of the Top 500 companies of Central and Eastern Europe by
Deloitte has come up with specific features of Ukraine's economy. More than
50% of the biggest Ukrainian companies are therefore owned by local investors
whereas for the whole region this number accounts only to 15,4%. Deloitte
explains the difference with the low investment attractiveness for foreign
investors. Furthermore, the biggest Ukrainian companies feature a considerable
higher average headcount (35’600 vs. 6’600 employees) and lower productivity
(EUR 47’000 revenue per employee vs. EUR 207’000 for the whole region).

### Natural resources

Ukraine is relatively rich in natural resources, particularly in mineral
deposits. Although oil and natural gas reserves in Ukraine are largely
exhausted, it has other important energy sources, such as coal,
hydroelectricity, and nuclear-fuel raw materials.

### Ukrainian economy in graphics

  * GDP (PPP) of Ukraine

  * Ukraine's GDP (PPP) per capita

  * Ukraine's population from 1950

  * 2022 GNI per capita:  

Ukraine (3 000 $)

Higher GNI per capita compared to Ukraine

Lower GNI per capita compared to Ukraine

  * Average monthly salary in November 2021 (ranks by region)

## Sectors

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( January 2016)_  
---|---  
  
### Industries

A Zenit-2, produced by the former Yuzhmash, Ukrainian rocket manufacturer

Ukraine is home to companies operating in around 20 major industries, namely
power generation, fuel, ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy, chemical and
petrochemical and gas, machine building and metal-working, forest, wood-
working and wood pulp and paper, construction materials, light, food, and
others. Industry accounted for 26% of GDP in 2012. Ukraine has a massive high-
tech industrial base, including electronics, armaments, and space programme.

#### Mining and production

Ukraine is one of the world's most important mineral producing countries, in
terms of both the range and size of its reserves. There are nearly 8,000
separate deposits, harboring some 90 different minerals, of which about 20 are
economically significant. About half of all the known deposits are under
exploitation. Coal reserves in Ukraine amount to 47.1 billion tons. The annual
domestic demand for coal as fuel is about 100 million tons, of which 85
percent can be satisfied by domestic production.

Ukraine has oil and gas fields that meet 10 percent of its oil and 20 percent
of its gas consumption, respectively. Ukraine contains natural gas reserves of
39.6 billion cubic feet (1.12 billion cubic metres), but only about 20 percent
of Ukraine's demand is met by domestic production. Deposits of iron ore
(estimated at 28 billion tons), manganese ore (3 billion tons), chalk and
limestone (1.5 billion tons) are also large in Ukraine. The domestic
industrial sector suffers from constant energy shortages and energy supply
payment debts totaling about $792 million at the end of 1995. Ukraine
increased oil and gas production in 2023 up to 18.7 bcm.

In 2019, Ukraine was the 7th largest world producer of iron ore, the world's
8th largest producer of manganese, 6th largest producer of titanium, and 7th
largest producer worldwide of graphite. Ukraine was the world's 9th largest
producer of uranium in 2018. Before the 2022 escalation of the war with Russia
Ukraine supplied about 50% of the world's neon gas and 40% of its krypton,
both of which are needed for the production of semiconductors. It is estimated
that over 90% of U.S. semiconductor-grade neon supplies were imported from
Ukraine.

##### Iron and steel

Ukraine is rich in mineral deposits, including iron ore (of which it once
produced 50 percent of the entire Soviet output), manganese ore (of which it
produced 40 percent of world output during the Soviet era), mercury, titanium,
and nickel.

Ukraine has a major ferrous metal industry, producing cast iron, steel, and
pipes. Among its economy leading companies in that field are Metinvest,
Kryvorizhstal, AzovStal, Ilyich Steel & Iron Works, and others. As of 2012,
Ukraine is the world's tenth largest steel producer (according to the World
Steel Association).

#### Chemical industry

Another important branch was the country's chemical industry which included
the production of coke, mineral fertilizers, and sulfuric acid. Production of
coke dropped tremendously due to the Russo-Ukrainian War.

#### Defence industry

A BM Oplot, produced by KMDB

Ukraine's defence industry is organised around Ukroboronprom, a state owned
conglomerate of over 130 companies. These companies include Soviet era giants
such as Ivchenko-Progress aircraft design bureau that was opened in 1945, to
newer companies such as RPC Fort which came into existence in the 1990s.
Ukraine is among the top 10 arms exporters in the world.

The signing of recent large contracts may put Ukraine into 6th place among
biggest arms traders, after the United States, Russia, France, Germany, and
Israel. The output of Ukrainian defence plants grew 58% in 2009, with largest
growth reported by aircraft builders (77%) and ship builders (71%).

In 2013, Ukraine's defence sector manufactured a total of ₴11.7 billion worth
of goods, ₴10 billion of which were exported. In the first 9 months of 2014
Ukraine's defence sector produced a record ₴13 billion worth of goods. The
increase was largely due to government orders for the war in Donbas.

#### Fuel and energy complex

Due to Ukraine's large population and its significant energy consumption, it
is one of the largest energy markets on the European continent. Ukraine's
location at the intersection of Europe, Russia, the Black Sea, and the Caspian
Sea provides its ample natural resources such as coal, oil, natural gas, as
well as significant potential for hydro and biomass energy.

Ukraine relies heavily on imports for natural gas and oil products. It is a
key transit site for European imports of Russian gas. Ukraine transits more
natural gas than any other country. Prior to the full-scale Russian invasion
of Ukraine in 2022, economic crises, Russia's closure of its market, and the
Russo-Ukrainian War in eastern Ukraine since 2014 had stymied some of the
country's growth. Ukraine's energy policy has created incentives for
investment in renewable energy sources, but these remain uncertain. Since
2015, Ukrainian energy policy has favoured reducing natural gas subsidies
alongside diversifying energy supply. Ukraine participates in the European
Union's EU4Energy Programme, an effort to promote evidence-based policy making
in national energy sectors.

##### Fuel industry

Ukraine remains heavily reliant on oil product and gas imports. Russia ranks
as Ukraine's principal supplier of oil, and Russian firms own and/or operate
the majority of Ukraine's refining capacity. Natural gas imports come from
Russia – which delivers its own gas, as well as the gas from
Turkmenistan.[_citation needed_]

Ukraine has been a key transit point for EU imports of Russian gas, and its
pipeline system has been a crucial player in European energy supply, despite
recent diversification of transit routes by Russian oil companies such as
Gazprom. Since the 2014 Russia–Ukraine gas disputes, the latter's dependence
on Russian gas supplies has dramatically affected its economics and foreign
policy.[_citation needed_]

Ukraine was independent in its electricity supply, and exported electricity to
Russia and other countries of Eastern Europe. This was achieved through a wide
use of nuclear power and hydroelectricity. Its energy strategy intended a
gradual decreasing of gas- and oil-based generation in favour of nuclear
power, as well as energy saving measures including lower industrial gas
consumption. Reform of the still inefficient and opaque energy sector was a
major objective of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank
programs with Ukraine.[_citation needed_]

Ukraine was a partner country of the European Union's INOGATE energy
programme, which had four key topics: enhancing energy security, convergence
of member state energy markets on the basis of EU internal energy market
principles, supporting sustainable energy development, and attracting
investment for energy projects of common and regional interest. INOGATE was
discontinued in 2016.

#### Automotive industry

A LAZ-5208DL built by Lviv Bus Factory A modern Electron T5L64 tram

Ukraine automobile manufacturers produces diesel locomotives, tractors,
trucks, buses, trolleybuses, own-designed cars and trams. There are 12
automobile manufacturers in Ukraine, including ZAZ, LuAZ, Bogdan, KrAZ,
Eurocar, Electron, and LAZ.

ZAZ (Zaporizhzhia Automobile Building Plant) is the main automobile-
manufacturer of Ukraine, based in the south-eastern city of Zaporizhzhia.
Passenger car manufacturing in Ukraine started in 1959. From 1960 to 1994, a
total of 3,422,444 Zaporozhets vehicles were manufactured in Zaporizhzhia and
engines with air-cooling in Melitopol. In 2011–2012, the Zaporizhzhia
Automobile Building Plant started serial full-scale production of two new
models of vehicle, the ZAZ Forza (a re-badged Chinese Chery A13) and the ZAZ
Vida (a re-badged Daewoo Aveo).

The Bogdan Corporation is a leading Ukrainian automobile-manufacturing group,
including several car- and bus-makers of Ukraine. Bogdan buses (re-badged
Isuzu models) are used as the primary small buses in most Ukrainian cities.

LAZ used to be one of the major bus manufacturers in Ukraine. It manufactured
city buses, coach buses, trolley buses, and special purpose buses. The company
has been defunct since 2014.

The Lviv-based company Electrontrans is an enterprise of a full-scale
production, specialising in design and production of modern urban electric
transport – trams, trolleybuses, electric buses, units, and spare parts. In
2013 Electrotrans starts producing low-floor trams, the first Ukrainian 100%
low-floor tramways.

#### Aircraft and aerospace industry

The Antonov An-225 _Mriya_ was the largest aircraft in the world prior to its
destruction in 2022.

Ukraine is one of nine countries with a full cycle of aerospace hardware
engineering and production. Besides the design and production of passenger and
transportation aircraft, Ukraine has a network of aircraft repair enterprises,
including companies involved in the recovery of military planes and
helicopters.[_citation needed_] In March 2007, the Cabinet of Ministers of
Ukraine created the state aircraft building concern Aviation of Ukraine
(SACAU), which is governed by the Ministry of Industrial Policy. Production of
An-148 aircraft is now one of the most prospective projects for the Ukrainian
plane manufacturing industry with 35 units manufactured since 2009 (together
with Russian production).

The aircraft were engineered by the Antonov Scientific and Production Complex
Design Office (Antonov ANTK). The largest single airplane in the world,
Antonov An-225 Mriya was designed by Antonov ANTK and made in 1988. The gross
production of light and ultra light planes in Ukraine does not exceed 200
units per annum. Production of hang-gliders and paragliders of all designs
makes nearly 1,000 units each year. Most of produced devices are exported. The
main buyers of Ukrainian-made ultra-light aircraft are the United States,
Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, France, etc..

Since 2014, aerospace industry revenues have fallen by 80%. In June 2016, the
Antonov Corporation merged with the state-owned military conglomerate
Ukroboronprom, forming Ukrainian Aircraft Corporation within its structure.
This merger was done to boost Antonov profits and the production rate. In
2018, Antonov was working on two cargo planes: the An-178, a cargo version of
the An-158, and the An-132D, a redesigned version of the An-32. The An-132 was
developed jointly with Saudi's Taqnia Aeronautics Company, featuring western
avionics and engines. The roll out and first flight was due at the beginning
of January 2017.

The space rocket industry in Ukraine has been managed by the State Space
Agency of Ukraine since 1992. The agency included 30 enterprises, scientific
research institutes, and design offices. Pivdenne Design Bureau was in general
responsible for creating the Zenit-3SL carrier rocket. In 2013, The National
Space Agency of Ukraine was involved in cooperation with American Rockwell
Int., as well as the Sea Launch project. Yuzhnoye SDO was the designer and
manufacturer of the initial first stage core of the U.S. Orbital ATK Antares
rocket.

  

#### Shipbuilding

MV Minerva − a passenger ship built in Ukraine

Ukraine is one of the 10 largest shipbuilding countries in Europe. There are
49 shipbuilding companies registered in Ukraine. They are able to build a wide
range of vessel types: powerboats, barges, bulk carriers (dry cargo ship),
tankers, liquefied gas carriers, etc.

The USSR's collapse put Ukraine's shipbuilding into a long-term decline. This
lasted until 1999 and was mostly due to a minimum volume of state shipbuilding
orders. Between 1992 and 2003, Ukraine's 11 shipyards produced 237 navigation
units for a total value of US$1.5 billion. Production facilities are not
working near full capacity, and customers are not always timely in paying for
services. The shipbuilding industry grew between 2000 and 2006, in line with
the wider Ukrainian economic expansion at the time.

State support and the opening of free economic zones, foremost at enterprises
based in Mykolaiv were a crucial recent development in Ukraine's shipbuilding
industry. Within the Mykolaiv Special Economic Zone, enterprises like Damen
Shipyards Okean, Chornomorskyi (Black Sea) Shipbuilding Plant (defunct since
2021), 61 Communards Shipbuilding Plant, as well as the Veselka (Rainbow)
paint and insulation enterprise are implementing investment projects targeted
to raise efficiency and quality in primarily export-oriented vessels through
production upgrades. The new engineering developments and high potential of
Ukrainian designers provide the ability to build high quality vessels with
competitive prices.

### Agriculture

A Ukrainian T-150K tractor built by the Kharkiv Tractor Plant Ukraine's flag
resembles the nation's farmlands. Vineyards in Zakarpattia Oblast

Although typically known as the industrial base of the Soviet Union,
agriculture is a large part of Ukraine's economy. Ukraine is one of the
world's largest agricultural producers and exporters and is known as the
"breadbasket" of Europe.

In 2008, agriculture accounted for 8.29% of Ukraine's GDP and by 2012 had
grown to 10.43% of the GDP. Agriculture accounted for $13.98 billion of value
added to the economy of Ukraine in 2012. Despite being a top 10 world producer
of several crops such as wheat and corn Ukraine still only ranks 24 out of 112
nations measured in terms of overall agricultural production.

In 2011, Ukraine was the world's largest producer of sunflower oil, a major
global producer of grain and sugar, and a potential global player on meat and
dairy markets. It was one of the largest producers of nuts. Ukraine produced
more natural honey than any other European country and was one of the world's
largest honey producers. An estimated 1.5% of its population was involved in
honey production, therefore Ukraine had the highest honey per capita
production rate in the world. Because Ukraine possesses 30% of the world's
richest black soil, making its agricultural industry have huge potential.

At the beginning of the 21st century, Ukraine's agricultural industry was
highly profitable, generating profit margins of 40–60%. Analysts indicated
that the sector had the potential to increase its output by up to four times.
Ukraine was the world's 6th largest, 5th if not including the EU as a separate
state, producer of corn in the world and the 3rd largest corn exporter in the
world. In 2012, Ukraine signed a contract with China, the world's largest
importer of corn, to supply China with 3 million tonnes of corn annually at
market price. The deal included a $3 billion line of credit extension from
China to Ukraine.

In 2014, Ukraine's total grain crop was estimated to be a record 64 million
metric tons. In 2014, Ukraine lost control over portions of several regions to
Russia, followed by the start of the war in Donbas and the annexation of
Crimea by the Russian Federation, hence the actual available crop yield was
closer to 60.5 million metric tons. Due to the decline of the metallurgy
industry, which was previously Ukraine's top export category, agricultural
products have become Ukraine's largest export category as a result of the war
in Donbas.

Since at least 2011, farmland was remaining as the only major asset in Ukraine
that was not privatised. In March 2020, the Ukrainian parliament lifted a ban
on the sale of farmland. The land market was fully opened for the first time
independence on 1 July 2021.

Agricultural output of Ukraine since 1961, in 2015 US$

Ukraine also produces some wine, mostly in the South-Western regions.

In 2018:

  * It was the 5th largest world producer of maize (35.8 million metric tons (35,200,000 long tons; 39,500,000 short tons)), after the U.S., China, Brazil, and Argentina;
  * It was the 8th largest world producer of wheat (24.6 million metric tons (24,200,000 long tons; 27,100,000 short tons));
  * It was the 3rd largest world producer of potatoes (22.5 million metric tons (22,100,000 long tons; 24,800,000 short tons)), second only to China and India;
  * It was the world's largest producer of sunflower seed (14.1 million metric tons (13,900,000 long tons; 15,500,000 short tons));
  * It was the 7th largest world producer of sugar beets (13.9 million metric tons (13,700,000 long tons; 15,300,000 short tons)), which is used to produce sugar and ethanol;
  * It was the 7th largest world producer of barley (7.3 million metric tons (7,200,000 long tons; 8,000,000 short tons));
  * It was the 7th largest world producer of rapeseed (2.7 million metric tons (2,700,000 long tons; 3,000,000 short tons));
  * It was the 13th largest world producer of tomatoes (2.3 million metric tons (2,300,000 long tons; 2,500,000 short tons));
  * It was the 5th largest world producer of cabbage (1.6 million metric tons (1,600,000 long tons; 1,800,000 short tons)), after China, India, South Korea, and Russia;
  * It was the 11th largest world producer of apples (1.4 million metric tons (1,400,000 long tons; 1,500,000 short tons));
  * It was the 3rd largest world producer of pumpkins (1.3 million metric tons (1,300,000 long tons; 1,400,000 short tons)), second only to China and India;
  * It was the 6th largest world producer of cucumbers (985 thousand metric tons (969,000 long tons; 1,086,000 short tons));
  * It was the 5th largest world producer of carrots (841 thousand metric tons (828,000 long tons; 927,000 short tons)), after China, Uzbekistan, the U.S., and Russia;
  * It was the 4th largest world producer of dry peas (775 thousand metric tons (763,000 long tons; 854,000 short tons)), second only to Canada, Russia, and China;
  * It was the 7th largest world producer of rye (393 thousand metric tons (387,000 long tons; 433,000 short tons));
  * It was the 3rd largest world producer of buckwheat (137 thousand metric tons (135,000 long tons; 151,000 short tons)), second only to China and Russia;
  * It was the 6th largest world producer of walnuts (127 thousand metric tons (125,000 long tons; 140,000 short tons));
  * It produced 4.4 million metric tons (4,300,000 long tons; 4,900,000 short tons) of soy;
  * It produced 883 thousand metric tons (869,000 long tons; 973,000 short tons) of onions;
  * It produced 467 thousand metric tons (460,000 long tons; 515,000 short tons) of grapes;
  * It produced 418 thousand metric tons (411,000 long tons; 461,000 short tons) of oats;
  * It produced 396 thousand metric tons (390,000 long tons; 437,000 short tons) of watermelons;
  * It produced 300 thousand metric tons (300,000 long tons; 330,000 short tons) of cherries;

in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

Professionalised, scientific breeding of barley began in 1910 and now supplies
improved cultivars to the country.

### Information technology

Ukrainian National IT Factory in Kyiv

Ukraine has a long-standing reputation as a major technology region, with a
well-developed scientific and educational base. In March 2013, Ukraine ranked
4th in the world in number of certified IT professionals after the United
States, India, and Russia. On top of that, experts recognised both the
quantitative and qualitative potential of Ukrainian specialists. In 2011, the
number of IT specialists working in the industry reached 25,000 people with
20% growth. The volume of the Ukrainian IT market in 2013 was estimated to be
up to 3.6 billion U.S. dollars.

In 2017, Ukraine emerged as the top outsourcing destination of the year,
according to the Global Sourcing Association. By 2017, there were 13 research
and development centres of global companies located in Ukraine, including
Ericsson Ukraine, in Lviv.

As for 2019, the number of IT specialists involved in the IT industry of
Ukraine reached 172,000 people. The share of IT industry in Ukraine's GDP is
4%.

According to the IT sector report of 2019, Ukraine is the largest exporter of
IT services in Europe, and ranks among the 25 most attractive countries for
software development worldwide.

### Infrastructure

#### Maritime

An EKr-1 multiple unit built by Kriukiv Railway Car Building Works. Rail
transport is heavily used in Ukraine

About 100,000 Ukrainians regularly work on foreign merchant ships, one of the
largest group of Ukrainian labour migrants and the sixth largest number of
sailors from any country. They are attracted by the high salaries of more than
$1,000 per month.

Every major Ukrainian coastal city has a maritime university.

#### Communications

Ukraine ranks eighth among the world's nations in terms of the Internet speed
with the average download speed of 1,190 kbit/s. Five national providers of
fixed (DSL, ADSL, XDSL) internet access — Ukrtelecom, Vega Telecom, Datagroup,
Ukrnet, Volia, and 3 national operators of mobile internet – Vodafone Ukraine,
Kyivstar, lifecell are currently operating in Ukraine. Every regional centre
and large district centre has a number of local providers and home networks.

2011 revenues from Internet service providing in Ukraine reached ₴4.75
billion.

Over 16 million Ukrainians had Internet access in 2012, growing to 22 million
in 2015. In Kyiv, 90% of the population had internet access.

The mobile-cellular telephone system's expansion has slowed, largely due to
saturation of the market which has reached 144 mobile phone subscriptions per
100 people.

### Tourism

Rynok square, Lviv

In 2012, Ukraine was the 8th most popular tourism destination in Europe with
23 million visitors. The country's tourism industry is generally considered to
be underdeveloped, but it does provide crucial support for Ukraine's economy.
In 2012, the contribution of tourism to the GDP amounted to ₴28.8 billion, or
2.2% of GDP and directly supported 351,500 jobs (1.7% of total employment).

#### Shopping tourism

Ukraine's neighbours (Belarusians, Hungarians, Poles, Russians, and Slovaks)
are known to come to Ukraine to purchase products (such as food or gasoline)
and presents that are cheaper in Ukraine than in their home countries.

#### Recreational tourism and sightseeing

Ukraine has impressive landscapes, ruins of ancient castles, historical parks,
vineyards where they produce native wines, unique structures such as Saint
Sophia Cathedral or Chersonesos. Officially, there are seven World Heritage
Sites in Ukraine. The Carpathian Mountains suitable for skiing, hiking,
fishing and hunting. Bukovel — is the largest ski resort in Ukraine situated
in the Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast (province) of western Ukraine. The 2010–2011
winter season recorded 1,200,000-day visits with foreigners amounting to 8–10%
of all visitors. In 2012, the Bukovel was named the fastest growing ski resort
worldwide. The coastline on the Black Sea is a popular summer destination for
vacationers, especially Odesa.

### Financing, banking, investments

National Bank of Ukraine

#### Investments

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( December 2013)_  
---|---  
  
A political crisis in the middle of 2006 was feared as a threat to economic
and investment stability, however, despite the forecasts, the political
situation has not scared investors. The GDP showed a good growth rate of 7% in
2007, compared to the previous year. Industrial output has increased. Car
sales have soared, while the banking sector has expanded, thanks to the
arrival of European banks.

#### International financial institutions

In 1992, Ukraine became a member of the IMF and the World Bank. It is also a
member of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

In 2008, the country joined the World Trade Organization (WTO). Ukraine
applied for WTO membership in 1993, but its accession process was stalled for
15 years.

#### Foreign direct investment

To encourage foreign trade and investment, the Ukrainian parliament approved a
foreign investment law allowing foreigners to purchase businesses and
property, to repatriate revenue and profits, and to receive compensation if
the property is nationalised by a future government. Complex laws and
regulations, poor corporate governance, weak enforcement of contract law by
courts, and corruption, continued to prevent direct large-scale foreign
investment in Ukraine. There is a functioning stock market, but portfolio
investment activities have been restricted by a historic lack of protection of
shareholders' rights.[_citation needed_]

As of April 2011, total foreign direct investment stock in Ukraine stood at
$44.7 billion. Statistics from FDi Magazine show that Ukraine suffered a year
on year decline in foreign direct investment between 2010 and 2013.

State enterprise InvestUkraine was created under the State Agency for
Investment and National Projects (_National Projects_) to serve as a one-stop
stop for investors and to deliver investment consulting services.

Ukraine signed a shale gas exploration deal with Royal Dutch Shell on 25
January 2013. The $10 billion deal was the largest foreign direct investment
ever for Ukraine.

Many companies, owned by foreigners, have been successfully operating in
Ukraine since its independence. These include companies in agriculture, such
as Kyiv-Atlantic Group, founded in 1994 by David Sweere. He sold its business
in Minnesota and invested in Ukraine, believing in its huge potential. The
company has been operating at a profit since 2002. As a result, he became the
fifth richest among the Westerners who made their fortune in Ukraine.

In 2016, foreign direct investment in Ukraine's economy amounted to $3.8
billion in 2016, which was almost twice more than in 2015.

#### Monetary policy and banking

| **This section is empty.** You can help by adding to it. _( January 2016)_  
---|---  
  
#### Stock exchanges

#### Insurance business and companies

| **This section is empty.** You can help by adding to it. _( January 2016)_  
---|---  
  
## Legal environment and economic support

### Background

Since the late 1990s, the Ukrainian government has pledged to reduce the
number of government agencies, streamline the regulatory process, create a
legal environment to encourage entrepreneurs, and enact a comprehensive tax
overhaul. In 2003, the IMF encouraged Ukraine to quicken the pace and scope of
reforms, threatening to withdraw financial support.

On 24 June 2010, Ukraine's Foreign Minister Kostyantyn Hryshchenko signed a
free trade agreement with the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
According to the Global Competitiveness Report of 2012–2013, "the country's
most important challenge is the needed overhaul of its institutional
framework, which cannot be relied on because it suffers from red tape, lack of
transparency, and favouritism." In reports by the _Kyiv Post_ in 2010 and 2011
respectively, a "double taxation avoidance" treaty with Cyprus signed in 1982
by the Soviet Union has cost Ukraine billions of U.S. dollars of tax revenues.

The 2014 campaign of lustration in Ukraine was criticised by Mark Varga,
writing in _The National Interest_ as it might have adverse economic effects.
On 29 May 2014, Ukraine entered into the European Union–Ukraine Association
Agreement, that reached its full application on 1 September 2017.

### Foreign workers

A number of foreign guest workers come to work in Ukraine, mainly in seasonal
farm work and construction industry, especially from neighbouring Moldova and
Belarus.

## War Economy

Following the onset of the Russian-Ukrainian War in 2022, Ukraine's GDP
declined by nearly 30%. Despite economic growth in 2023 and 2024, the economy
remains smaller than it was before the war. In 2023, GDP increased by 5.3%,
and in 2024 by 3.6%. The International Monetary Fund forecasts that Ukraine's
GDP growth will slow to between 2% and 3% in 2025, citing challenges such as
labor shortages, damage to energy infrastructure, and the ongoing war.

## Environmental issues

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( January 2016)_  
---|---  
  
Ukraine is interested in cooperating on regional environmental issues.
Conservation of natural resources is a stated high priority, although
implementation suffers from a lack of financial resources. Ukraine established
its first nature preserve, Askania-Nova, in 1921 and has programs to breed
endangered species.

Ukraine has a Ministry of Environment and has introduced a pollution fee
system that levies taxes on air and water emissions and solid waste disposal.
The resulting revenues are channelled to environmental protection activities,
but enforcement of this pollution fee system is lax. Industrial pollution
remains a considerable problem in Ukraine.

Significant environmental problems result from the Chernobyl nuclear power
plant disaster in 1986. In accordance with its previously announced plans,
Ukraine permanently closed the Chernobyl Atomic Energy Station in December
2000. In November 2001, Ukraine withdrew an application it had made to the
EBRD for funding to complete two new reactor units to compensate for the
energy once produced by Chernobyl. Ukrainian concern over reform conditions
attached to the loan – particularly tariff increases needed to ensure loan
repayment—led the Ukrainian government to withdraw the application on the day
the EBRD Board was to have considered final approval.

The Russo-Ukrainian War significantly impacts the environmental situation.
Thirty-six thousand tons of waste, including toxic chemicals such as copper
and zinc, have entered water bodies, posing dangers to human organs and the
nervous system. Three million hectares of forests need to be demined, and
forest fires caused by shelling occur in 30% of the country's forest area. The
war has released approximately 67,532,788 tons of hazardous emissions, causing
respiratory and cardiovascular issues.

## Ukrainian companies

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Ukraine
is Services with 512,393 companies followed by Wholesale Trade and
Manufacturing with 288,072 and 93,637 companies respectively.

  * 1+1 Media Group – media
  * 4AGames – Technology
  * Antonov – Industrials
  * APEKS-BANK – Financials
  * ATB-Market – Consumer Services
  * BG Capital – Financials
  * Bogdan group – Industrials
  * Chumak – Consumer goods
  * Ciklum – IT
  * DTEK – Oil & Gaz, Basic Materials, Utilities
  * EKTA – Technology
  * Electron – Industrials
  * Epicentre K – Consumer services
  * ESTA Holding – Financials
  * FED – Aerospace industry
  * Ferreexpo – Basic Materials
  * FOM-Ukraine – Industrials
  * Fozzy Group – Consumer services
  * Galnaftogaz – Oil & Gas
  * GSC Game World – Technology
  * Hromadske.ua – Media
  * Industrial Union of Donbas – Industrials
  * InvestUkraine – Industrials
  * Kryukiv Railway Car Building Works – Industrials
  * Kyivstar – Telecommunications
  * Kuznia na Rybalskomu – Shipbuilding, arms industry
  * Lifecell – Telecommunications
  * METRO Cash&Carry – Consumer services
  * MHP – Consumer goods
  * Motor Sich – Industrials
  * Nemiroff – Consumer goods
  * Naftogaz – Oil & Gas
  * Nibulon – Agriculture & Shipbuilding
  * Obolon – Consumer goods
  * Oschadbank – banking
  * PrivatBank – banking
  * Roshen – Consumer goods
  * SCM Holdings – Financials
  * SoftServe – IT
  * Ukraine International Airlines – Consumer services
  * Ukrainian Automobile Corporation – Consumer goods
  * Ukrainian Railways – Consumer services, Industrials
  * Ukrnafta – Oil & Gas
  * Ukroboronprom
  * Ukrtelecom – Telecommunications
  * Vodafone Ukraine – Telecommunications
  * WOG – Oil & Gas, Consumer services
  * Pivdenmash – Industrials
  * Zaporizhstal – Basic materials
  * ZAZ – Consumer goods

## Facts and figures

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( January 2016)_  
---|---  
  
**Household income or consumption by percentage share:**

  * _lowest 10%:_ 3.4% (2006)
  * _highest 10%:_ 25.7% (2006)

**Poverty rate:** 4% in 2018 (below US$5.5/day).

**Industrial production growth rate:** 6% (2007 est.), 6.5 (2008)

**Electricity:**

  * _production:_ 192.1 billion kWh (2006)
  * _consumption:_ 181.9 billion kWh (2006)
  * _export:_ 10.07 billion kWh (2005)
  * _import:_ 20 billion kWh (2006)

**Electricity – production by source:**

  * _fossil fuel:_ 48.6%
  * _hydro:_ 7.9%
  * _nuclear:_ 43.5%
  * _other:_ 0% (2001)

**Oil:**

  * _production:_ 90,400 barrels per day (14,370 m3/d) (2006)
  * _consumption:_ 284,600 barrels per day (45,250 m3/d) (2006)
  * _exports:_ 214,600 barrels per day (34,120 m3/d) (2004)
  * _imports:_ 469,600 barrels per day (74,660 m3/d) (2004)
  * _proved reserves:_ 395,000,000 barrels (62,800,000 m3) (1 January 2006 est.)

**Natural gas:**

  * _production:_ 20.85 billion cubic m (2006 est.)
  * _consumption:_ 73.94 billion cubic m (2006 est.)
  * _exports:_ 4 billion cubic m (2006 est.)
  * _imports:_ 57.09 billion cubic m (2006 est.)
  * _proved reserves:_ 1.075 trillion cubic m (1 January 2006 est.)

**Agriculture – exports:** grain, sugar beets, sunflower seeds, vegetables,
beef, milk, natural honey.

**Agriculture – imports:** seafood, pork, beef, grain.

**Exchange rates:** hryvnia per US$1 – 22 (2015), 7.97 (2009), 5.05 (2007),
5.05 (2006), 5.13 (2005), 5.33 (May 2004), 5.30 (October 2002), 5.59 (February
2000), 5.3811 (January 2000), 4.1304 (1999), 2.4495 (1998), 1.8617 (1997),
1.8295 (1996), 1.4731 (1995)

**Minimum wage:** ₴6,000/ ~$210 per month (from 2021 to 2001–01)

**Average salary by region**