The **economy of Antigua and Barbuda** is service-based, with tourism and
government services representing the key sources of employment and income.
Tourism accounts directly or indirectly for more than half of GDP and is also
the principal earner of foreign exchange in Antigua and Barbuda. However, a
series of violent hurricanes since 1995 resulted in serious damage to tourist
infrastructure and periods of sharp reductions in visitor numbers. In 1999 the
budding offshore financial sector was seriously hurt by financial sanctions
imposed by the United States and United Kingdom as a result of the loosening
of its money-laundering controls. The government has made efforts to comply
with international demands in order to get the sanctions lifted. The dual
island nation's agricultural production is mainly directed to the domestic
market; the sector is constrained by the limited water supply and labor
shortages that reflect the pull of higher wages in tourism and construction.
Manufacturing comprises enclave-type assembly for export with major products
being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components. Prospects for economic
growth in the medium term will continue to depend on income growth in the
industrialized world, especially in the US, which accounts for about one-third
of all tourist arrivals. Estimated overall economic growth for 2000 was 2.5%.
Inflation has trended down going from above 2 percent in the 1995-99 period
and estimated at 0 percent in 2000.

To lessen its vulnerability to natural disasters, Antigua has been
diversifying its economy. Transportation, communications and financial
services are becoming important.

Antigua is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU). The
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) issues a common currency (the East
Caribbean dollar) for all members of the ECCU. The ECCB also manages monetary
policy, and regulates and supervises commercial banking activities in its
member countries.

Antigua and Barbuda is a beneficiary of the U.S. Caribbean Basin Initiative.
Its 1998 exports to the U.S. were valued at about US $3 million and its U.S.
imports totaled about US $84 million. It also belongs to the predominantly
English-speaking Caribbean Community (CARICOM).

## Economic history

Prior to colonization, several Amerindian groups inhabited Antigua and
Barbuda, all of which relied on a subsistence lifestyle. British colonists
established settlements in the islands in 1632. After fighting off the Caribs,
Dutch, and French to stabilize their colonies, settlers grew tobacco, indigo,
cotton, and ginger as cash crops. As on many other Caribbean islands, sugar
cultivation became the most profitable enterprise, quickly surpassing other
crops in economic importance. Due to the vast tracts of land needed for large-
scale sugar production, rainforests on the islands were decimated. Timber from
the rainforests was used in shipbuilding and repair.

With the shift to a plantation economy, slaves were imported from Africa. Even
after the abolition of slavery in 1834, former slaves continued working in
servitude due to laws designed to keep providing plantations with cheap labor.
As the sugar industry began to wane, the plantation economy came to an end.

## Primary industries

### Agriculture

Some 30% of land on Antigua is under crops or potentially arable, with 18% in
use. Sea-island cotton is a profitable export crop. A modest amount of sugar
is harvested each year, and there are plans for production of ethanol from
sugarcane. Vegetables, including beans, carrots, cabbage, cucumbers,
plantains, squash, tomatoes, and yams, are grown mostly on small family plots
for local markets. Over the past 30 years, agriculture's contribution to the
GDP has fallen from over 40% to 12%. The decline in the sugar industry left
60% of the country's 66,000 acres (270 km2) under government control, and the
Ministry of Agriculture is encouraging self-sufficiency in certain foods in
order to curtail the need to import food, which accounts for about 25% by
value of all imports. Crops suffer from droughts and insect pests, and cotton
and sugar plantings suffer from soil depletion and the unwillingness of the
population to work in the fields. Mango production in 2004 was 1,430 tons.

### Animal husbandry

Livestock estimates in 2004 counted 14,300 head of cattle, 19,000 sheep, and
36,000 goats; there were some 5,700 hogs in the same year. Most livestock is
owned by individual households. Milk production in 2004 was an estimated 5,350
tons. The government has sought to increase grazing space and to improve
stock, breeding Nelthropp cattle and Black Belly sheep. There is a growing
poultry industry. In 1992, the European Development Bank provided $5 million
US to the government to help develop the livestock industry.

### Fishing

Most fishing is for local consumption, although there is a growing export of
the lobster catch to the United States and of some fish to Guadeloupe and
Martinique. Antiguans annually consume more fish per capita (46 kg/101.4 lb)
per year live weight than any other nation or territory in the Caribbean. The
main fishing waters are near shore or between Antigua and Barbuda. There are
shrimp and lobster farms operating, and the Smithsonian Institution has a
Caribbean king crab farming facility for the local market. The government has
encouraged modern fishing methods and supported mechanization and the building
of new boats. Fish landings in 2000 were 1,481 tons; the lobster catch, 42
tons. Exports of fish commodities in 2000 were valued at US$1.5 million.

### Mining

Few of the islands' mineral resources, which included limestone, building
stone, clay, and barite, were exploited until recently. Limestone and volcanic
stone have been extracted from Antigua for local construction purposes, and
the manufacture of bricks and tiles from local clay has begun on a small
scale. Barbuda produced a small amount of salt, while phosphate has been
collected from Redonda.

## Secondary industries

Industrial activity has shifted from the processing of local agriculture
produce to consumer and export industries using imported raw materials.
Industrial products include rum, refined petroleum, paints, garments,
furniture, and electrical components. The government encourages investment in
manufacturing establishments, and most industries have some government
participation.

Industry accounted for 19% of GDP in 2001. Manufacturing—which accounts for
approximately 5% of GDP—comprises enclave-type assembly for export with major
products being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components. Prospects for
economic growth depend on income growth in the industrialized world,
especially in the US, which accounts for about half of all tourist arrivals.
The industrial park, located in the Coolidge Area, produces a range of
products such as paints, furniture, garments, and galvanized sheets, mainly
for export.

## Tertiary industries

### Tourism

Tourism is the mainstay of the economy of Antigua and Barbuda and is the
leading sector in terms of providing employment and creating foreign exchange.
In 1999 it contributed 60 percent of GDP and more than half of all jobs.
According to the Americas Review 1998, tourism contributed 15 percent directly
and around 40 percent indirectly to the GDP in 1998. Real growth in this
sector has moved from an average of 7 percent for the period 1985-89 to 8.24
percent for the period 1990-95. There was slow growth between 1995 and 1998.

Figures released by the East Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) in 2000 show that
total visitor arrivals increased steadily from 470,975 in 1995 to 613,990 in
1998. In 1999 total visitor arrivals declined by about 4.1 percent to 588,866,
yet the number of visitors staying at least 1 night or more increased by 1.9
percent over 1998 to total 207,862. Arrivals via cruise ships in 1999 dropped
to 325,195, a fall of 3.4 percent over 1998. The fall-off in cruise passengers
was mainly the result of one of the larger cruise ships being out of service
for a brief period. Most of the tourists in 1999 came from the United Kingdom
and the United States. Visitor expenditures have increased steadily since
1990, with total expenditures of EC$782.9 million.

To combat increasing competition from other Caribbean destinations, the
government and the Antigua Hotel and Tourist Association have established a
joint fund to market the country's appeal as a tourist destination. The
association has agreed to match the proceeds from a 2 percent hotel guest levy
introduced by the government.

At the start of March 2001, the Antigua Workers Union (AWU), the trade union
which represents close to 7,000 workers in the tourism industry, described
tourism as an industry in crisis. The AWU claimed the industry is on the
decline because some airlines are pulling out of the country, and government
was not spending enough money to promote tourism. While the government has
conceded that it was not spending enough on marketing because of cash flow
problems, it has rejected the AWU's contention that the industry is in crisis.

### Visitor statistics

Most visitors arriving to Antigua and Barbuda as tourists are from the
following countries of nationality: This does not include numbers of tourists
disembarking as part of a cruise.

Country  | 2023  | 2022  | 2021  | 2020  | 2019  | 2018  | 2017  | 2016  | 2015  | 2014  | 2013   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
United States | 137,157  | 129,521  | 102,495  | 60,319  | 123,553  | 104,103 | 96,347 | 108,652 | 94,617 | 95,332 | 88,619   
United Kingdom | 68,278  | 79,900  | 48,328  | 31,765  | 76,837  | 70,607 | 70,701 | 76,512 | 77,890 | 71,193 | 68,854   
Canada | 28,775  | 17,611  | 4,055  | 15,716  | 37,225  | 38,087 | 22,932 | 21,196 | 23,270 | 27,701 | 30,235   
Italy | 2,584  | 2,343  | 598  | 2,249  | 9,735  | 6,832 | 8,527 | 8,600 | 7,032 | 7,976 | 7,942   
Trinidad and Tobago |  |  |  |  |  |  | 4,250 | 3,768 | 3,331 | 3,546 | 3,746   
Dominica |  |  |  |  |  |  | 4,153 | 3,988 | 3,728 | 2,913 | 2,954   
Jamaica |  |  |  |  |  |  | 3,876 | 3,932 | 3,857 | 3,543 | 3,273   
Barbados |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2,863 | 2,878 | 2,916 | 2,934 | 2,920   
Saint Kitts and Nevis |  |  |  |  |  |  | 2,213 | 2,651 | 2,175 | 2,490 | 2,741   
Germany | 1,061  | 776  | 377  | 718  | 2,125  | 2,216 | 2,120 | 2,165 | 2,505 | 2,665 | 2,443   
Total  | 281,896  | 265,119  | 169,469  | 125,083  | 300,990  | 268,949 | 247,320 | 265,187 | 250,450 | 249,316 | 243,219   
  
In 2012,

  * 81% of visitors to Antigua and Barbuda came for vacation,
  * 12% of visitors came to visit friends and family,
  * 3% visited for business,
  * and 4% visited for other reasons
  * 55% of visitors stayed for 4–7 days,
  * 28% for 8–14 days,
  * 9% for 1–3 days and
  * 8% for 15+ days.

### Air Arrivals from the United States

In Q4 2019,

  * 28.1% of air arrivals came from New York
  * 9.0% from Florida
  * 8.9% from New Jersey
  * 4.6% from California
  * 4.6% from Pennsylvania
  * 4.2% from Texas
  * 3.7% from Connecticut
  * 3.5% from Massachusetts
  * 2.8% from North Carolina
  * and 2.7% from Virginia

### Air Arrivals from Canada

In Q4 2019,

  * 7,055 air arrivals came from Ontario
  * 2,407 from Quebec
  * 421 from Alberta
  * 406 from British Columbia
  * 163 from Nova Scotia
  * 75 from Saskatchewan
  * 58 from Prince Edward Island
  * 50 from Manitoba
  * 49 from New Brunswick
  * 35 were Not Stated
  * 33 from Newfoundland

### Air Arrivals from the United Kingdom

In Q4 2019,

  * 5,351 air arrivals came from Greater London
  * 1,882 from Gloucester
  * 1,513 from Greater Manchester
  * 1,100 from Hampshire & Isle of Wight
  * 1,060 from Surrey
  * 768 from Kent
  * 732 from Essex
  * 503 from East Sussex
  * 378 from Berkshire
  * and 326 from Oxfordshire

### Air Arrivals Visitor Expenditure

**Average Daily Expenditure per Person (USD) for Q4 2019**

  * $356.06 for the United States of America
  * $277.70 for the United Kingdom
  * $260.91 for Continental Europe
  * $251.65 for the Caribbean
  * $239.38 for Latin America
  * $222.18 for Canada
  * $166.67 for Other

**Average Length of Stay for Q4 2019**

  * 14.4 for Other
  * 10.5 for Continental Europe
  * 10.4 for Latin America
  * 10.3 for the United Kingdom
  * 9.8 for the Caribbean
  * 8.9 for Canada
  * 8.5 for the United States of America

**Estimated Expenditure**

  * $96,730,286 for the United States of America
  * $68,939,192 for the United Kingdom
  * $24,294,241 for the Caribbean
  * $21,136,450 for Canada
  * $15,738,743 for Continental Europe
  * $3,405,668 for Other
  * $1,468,836 for Latin America

### Cruise Passenger Arrivals by Country of Residence

In Q4 2019,

  * 104,691 Cruise Passenger Arrivals were from the United States.
  * 61,442 from the UK
  * 32,935 from Germany
  * 14,669 from Canada
  * 7,761 other parts of Europe
  * 7,252 from other places
  * 5,114 from France
  * 2,088 from the Caribbean
  * 1,737 from Italy
  * 1,451 from South America
  * 1,146 from Switzerland

### Financial services

Antigua and Barbuda is advertised as "an attractive offshore jurisdiction."
The country was the first to sign the United Nations' anti-money laundering
act. This agreement came out of a conference in 1999 which urged worldwide
offshore financial centers to introduce laws to tighten their policing of
money laundering activities. The United Kingdom exerted considerable pressure
on Antigua and Barbuda to reform laws to combat money laundering, even issuing
an advisory in April 1999 to British financial institutions that Antigua and
Barbuda's anti-money laundering laws were wanting. Antigua and Barbuda
responded to this concern, and a subsequent joint United States and United
Kingdom review reported they were satisfied that the country had taken
positive steps to check illegal activity in this sector. In September 2000 the
government of Antigua and Barbuda announced that it had strengthened its
surveillance of money laundering and drug trafficking. In March 2009, the
Stanford Financial Group, based in Antigua was found by regulators there and
in the United States, of operating a massive ponzi scheme. The international
bank controlled by the Stanford group is now in receivership pending the
outcome of an investigation.[_citation needed_]

### Retail

The retail sector is dominated by the sale of food and beverages, clothing and
textiles, and vegetables. The main markets are located in the capital, St.
John's. There are many street vendors and duty-free shops. The government has
been taking steps to improve this sector. A US$43.5 million vendors' mall and
market has been built to provide better facilities for retailers in the
capital. In addition, a US$27 million fisheries complex now provides improved
facilities for fish processing and retailing. A growing area of computer
business on Antigua is Internet casinos.

## Statistics

**GDP:** purchasing power parity \- $1.61 billion (2008 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 189

**GDP - real growth rate:** 2.1% (2008 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 161

**GDP - per capita:** purchasing power parity - $19,000 (2008 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 64

**GDP - composition by sector:** _agriculture:_ 3.8% _industry:_ 22%
_services:_ 74.3% (2002 est.)

**Inflation rate (consumer prices):** 1.5% (2007 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 14

**Labor force:** 30,000 (1991)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 197

**Unemployment rate:** 11% (2001 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 130

**Budget:** _revenues:_ $123.7 million

_expenditures:_ $145.9 million (2000 est.)

**Central bank discount rate:** 6.5% (January 2008)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 57

**Agriculture - products:** cotton, fruits, vegetables, bananas, coconuts,
cucumbers, mangoes, sugarcane; livestock

**Industries:** tourism, construction, light manufacturing (clothing, alcohol,
household appliances)

**Electricity - production:** 105 million kWh (2006)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 188

**Electricity - consumption:** 97.65 million kWh (2006)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 189

**Electricity - exports:** 0 kWh (2007)

**Electricity - imports:** 0 kWh (2007)

**Oil - production:** 0 bbl/d (0 m3/d) (2007)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 116

**Oil - consumption:** 4,109 bbl/d (653.3 m3/d) (2006 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 169

**Oil - exports:** 157.7 bbl/d (25.07 m3/d) (2005)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 132

**Oil - imports:** 4,556 bbl/d (724.3 m3/d) (2005)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 161

**Oil - proved reserves:** 0 bbl (0 m3) (1 January 2006 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 99

**Natural gas - production:** 0 cu m (2007 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 209

**Natural gas - consumption:** 0 cu m (2007 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 209

**Natural gas - exports:** 0 cu m (2006 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 206

**Natural gas - imports:** 0 cu m (2006)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 205

**Natural gas - proved reserves:** 0 cu m (1 January 2006 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 206

**Exports:** $84.3 million (2007 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 199

**Exports - commodities:** petroleum products 48%, manufactures 23%, machinery
and transport equipment 17%, food and live animals 4%, other 8%

**Exports - partners:** Spain 34%, Germany 20.7%, Italy 7.7%, Singapore 5.8%,
UK 4.9% (2006)

**Imports:** $522.8 million (2007 est.)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 189

**Imports - commodities:** food and live animals, machinery and transport
equipment, manufactures, chemicals, oil

**Imports - partners:** US 21.1%, China 16.4%, Germany 13.3%, Singapore 12.7%,
Spain 6.5% (2006)

**Debt - external:** $359.8 million (June 2006)

    _country comparison to the world:_ 169

**Economic aid - recipient:** $7.23 million (2005)

**Currency:** 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

**Exchange rates:** East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7 (2007), 2.7
(2007), 2.7 (2006), 2.7 (2005), 2.7 (2004), 2.7 (2003) **note:** fixed rate
since 1976

**Fiscal year:** 1 April - 31 March