The **economy of Monaco** is reliant on tourism and banking. Monaco, situated
on the French coast of the Mediterranean Sea, is a popular resort, attracting
tourists to its casino and pleasant climate.

The Principality has successfully sought to diversify into services and small,
high-value-added, nonpolluting industries. The state has no income tax and low
business taxes and thrives as a tax haven both for individuals who have
established residence and for foreign companies that have set up businesses
and offices. The state retains monopolies in a number of sectors, including
gambling, tobacco, the telephone network, and the postal service.

Denture adhesion rings made in Monaco, early to mid 20th century

## Background

Economic development was spurred in the late 19th century with the opening of
the rail link to France and the Monte Carlo Casino. Monaco's economy is now
primarily geared toward finance, services, and real estate.

## Modern times

Low taxes have drawn many foreign individuals to Monaco and account for around
75% of the $7.78 billion annual GDP income in (2021).[_how?_] Similarly,
tourism accounts for close to 15% of the annual revenue, as the Principality
of Monaco also has been a major center for tourism ever since the famed Monte
Carlo Casino was established in 1856.

Financial and insurance activities, along with scientific, support-
administrative, activities are the main contributors to the GDP of Monaco.
Wholesale trades (10%), construction (9.1%) and real estate activities (7.8%)
also contribute highly to the country's GDP. Monaco real estate is known to be
one of the most expensive in the world. Banking sector of Monaco is rather
large: in 2015 consolidated banking assets 8.42 times exceeded the country's
GDP. Banks operating in Monaco traditionally specialize in private banking,
asset and wealth management services. Wholesale trade, construction and real
estate sectors come afterward in the ranking.

An economic and customs union with France governs customs, postal services,
telecommunications, and banking in Monaco. Before the euro, Monaco used the
Monegasque franc, which itself was pegged to the French franc. Now part of the
Eurozone, but not the EU, Monaco mints its own euro coins.

All residents pay tax in the form of 20% value-added tax on all goods and
services.

Monaco is noted for its activity in the field of marine sciences. Its
Oceanographic Museum, formerly directed by Jacques-Yves Cousteau, is one of
the most renowned institutions of its kind in the world. Monaco import and
exports products and services from all over the world. There is no commercial
agriculture in Monaco; it is 100% urban.

## Tax haven

Monaco levies no income tax on individuals. The absence of a personal income
tax in the principality has attracted to it a considerable number of wealthy
"tax refugee" residents from European countries who derive the majority of
their income from activity outside Monaco; celebrities such as Formula One
drivers attract most of the attention, but the vast majority of them are less
well-known business people.

In 2000, a report by the French parliamentarians, Arnaud Montebourg and
Vincent Peillon, alleged that Monaco had lax policies with respect to money
laundering, including within its famed casino, and that the government of
Monaco had been placing political pressure on the judiciary so that alleged
crimes were not properly investigated.

In 1998, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
issued a first report on the consequences of the tax havens' financial
systems. Monaco did not appear in the list of these territories until 2004,
when OECD became indignant regarding the Monegasque situation and denounced it
in its last report, as well as Andorra, Liechtenstein, Liberia and the
Marshall Islands, underlining its lack of co-operation as regards to financial
information disclosure and availability.

In 2000, the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) stated:
"The anti-money laundering system in Monaco is comprehensive. However,
difficulties have been encountered with Monaco by countries in international
investigations on serious crimes that appear to be linked also with tax
matters. In addition, the FIU of Monaco (SICCFIN) suffers a great lack of
adequate resources. The authorities of Monaco have stated that they will
provide additional resources to SICCFIN." The Principality is no longer blamed
in the 2005 FATF report, as well as all other territories. In 2003, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) has identified Monaco, along with 36 other
territories, as a tax haven but Monaco came out of that list in 2009.

In June 2024, due to concerns about money laundering and terror financing, the
FATF added Monaco to a list of countries "under increased monitoring." In a
statement, the FATF said that the country needed to "address strategic
deficiencies."

## National enterprises

Monaco's economy is also based on national companies, which combined produce
over a billion in profit every year. Among the most profitable and well-known
companies outside Monaco are the Société des bains de mer, the bank UBS
Monaco, the auction house Monaco Legend Group and the media conglomerate
Lagardère News.

## Companies

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Monaco
is Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate with 4,497 companies followed by
Services with 1,895 and 1,184 companies respectively.

## Public finances

In 2023 Monaco recorded government revenues of 2.19 billion EUR and expenses
of 2.07 billion EUR, for a 126 million EUR budget surplus.

The state's fiscal reserves, the Constitutional Reserve Fund (CRF), reached a
balance of 7 billion EUR in 2023, up from 5.7 billion EUR in 2019.