| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( March 2022)_  
---|---  
  
In ancient times, Maldives were renowned for cowries, coir rope, dried tuna
fish (Maldive fish), ambergris (_maavaharu_) and coco de mer (_tavakkaashi_).
Local and foreign trading ships used to load these products in the Maldives
and bring them abroad.

Nowadays, the mixed economy of Maldives is based on the principal activities
of tourism, fishing and shipping. This results from the Maldives' strategic
geographic positioning near crucial sea routes essential for China's energy
provisions. Consequently, China has persistently utilized its economic
resources to enhance its sway over the Maldivian government.

**Tourism** is the largest industry in the Maldives, accounting for 28% of GDP
and more than 60% of the Maldives' foreign exchange receipts. It powered the
current GDP per capita to expand 265% in the 1980s and a further 115% in the
1990s. Over 90% of government tax revenue flows in from import duties and
tourism-related taxes.

**Fishing** is the second leading sector in the Maldives. The economic reform
program by the government in 1989 lifted import quotas and opened some exports
to the private sector. Subsequently, it has liberalized regulations to allow
more foreign investment.

**Agriculture** and manufacturing play a minor role in the economy,
constrained by the limited availability of cultivable land and shortage of
domestic labour. Most staple foods are imported.

**Industry** in the Maldives consists mainly of garment production, boat
building, and handicrafts. It accounts for around 18% of GDP. Maldivian
authorities are concerned about the impact of erosion and possible global
warming in the low-lying country.

Among the 1,190 islands in the Maldives, only 198 are inhabited. The
population is scattered throughout the country, and the greatest concentration
is on the capital island, Malé. Limitations on potable water and arable land,
plus the added difficulty of congestion are some of the problems faced by
households in Malé.

Development of the infrastructure in the Maldives is mainly dependent on the
tourism industry and its complementary tertiary sectors, transport,
distribution, real estate, construction, and government. Taxes on the tourist
industry have been plowed into infrastructure and it is used to improve
technology in the agricultural sector.

## Macro-economic trend

This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Maldives at market
prices estimated [1] by the International Monetary Fund with figures in
millions of rufiyaa.

Year | Gross domestic product | US dollar exchange | Per capita income  
(as % of USA)  
---|---|---|---  
1980 | 440 | 7.58 rufiyaa | 3.11   
1985 | 885 | 7.08 rufiyaa | 3.85   
1990 | 2,054 | 9.55 rufiyaa | 4.34   
1995 | 4,696 | 11.76 rufiyaa | 6.29   
2000 | 7,348 | 11.77 rufiyaa | 6.77   
2005 | 10,458 | 12.80 rufiyaa | 5.33   
2011 | 10,458 | 15.40 rufiyaa | 7.43   
  
The Maldives has experienced relatively low inflation throughout the recent
years. Real GDP growth averaged about 10% in the 1980s. It expanded by an
exceptional 16.2% in 1990, declined to 4% in 1993, and, over the 1995–2004
decade, real GDP growth averaged just over 7.5% per year. In 2005, as a result
of the tsunami, the GDP contracted by about 5.5%; however, the economy
rebounded in 2006 with a 13% increase.

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2020.

Year  | 1980  | 1985  | 1990  | 1995  | 2000  | 2005  | 2010  | 2015  | 2020   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
GDP in $  
(PPP) | 0.24 bn.  | 0.51 bn.  | 0.80 bn.  | 1.24 bn.  | 2.01 bn.  | 2.86 bn.  | 4.65 bn.  | 7.63 bn.  | 7.27 bn.   
GDP per capita in $  
(PPP) | 1,599  | 2,791  | 3,768  | 5,090  | 7,444  | 9,732  | 14,528  | 21,931  | 19,222   
Inflation  
(in Percent Change) | 27.9 %  | -9.16 %  | 15.5 %  | 5.49 %  | −1.18 %  | 2.46 %  | 6.15 %  | 1.37 %  | -1.59 %   
Government debt  
(Percentage of GDP) | ...  | ...  | ...  | ...  | 39 %  | 43 %  | 53 %  | 55 %  | 146 %   
  
## Economic sectors

### Tourism

### Fishing

### Industry

The industrial sector provides only about 7% of GDP. Traditional industry
consists of boat building and handicrafts, while modern industry is limited to
a few tuna canneries, five garment factories, a bottling plant, and a few
enterprises in the capital producing PVC pipe, soap, furniture, and food
products. There are no patent laws in the Maldives.

### Financial

The banking industry dominates the small financial sector of the Maldives. The
country's seven banks are regulated by the Maldives Monetary Authority.

While formerly the Maldives had no income, sales, property, or capital-gains
taxes, and was considered to have the simplest tax code in the world, now
taxation is regulated by the Maldives Inland Revenue Authority (MIRA). In
2011, the Tax Justice Network gave the Maldives a "secrecy score" of 92 on its
Financial Secrecy Index - the highest score in that category of any actively-
ranked country; however by 2022 with a secrecy score of 75, no longer ranked
in the top ten. However in both 2011 and 2022, the Maldives' minor market
share put it near the bottom of the overall weighted lists.

A recurrent trend of Beijing leveraging its economic influence to attain
geopolitical goals is observable. This pattern is not confined solely to small
island nations in the Indian Ocean, like the Maldives and Sri Lanka, but
extends to the wider Indo-Pacific region, encompassing countries with sizable
and advanced economies as well. The Maldives government is grappling with
concerns about falling into a potential debt entrapment with China.

### Shipping

Beginning in the 1990s, the Port of Male received over £10 million in loans
from the Asian Development Bank designated for infrastructure upgraded. The
ADB notes that from 1991 to 2011, due to the loans, the ports annual
throughput in freight tons equaled 273,000. By 2011 that number reached 1
million. The ADB also provided training for port authority staff to increase
efficiency. ADB and the Government of Maldives, in a joint report address ship
turn-around, "What used to take about 10 days in 1991 was achieved in 3.8 days
by 1997, and about 2.6 days by 2014".

## Environmental concerns

There is growing concern towards the coral reef and marine life due to coral
mining (used for building and jewelry making), sand dredging, solid waste
pollution and oil spills from boats. Mining of sand and coral has destroyed
the natural coral reef that once protected several important islands, now
making them highly susceptible to the erosive effects of the sea. The
destruction of large coral beds due to heat is also a growing concern.

In April 1987, high tides swept over the Maldives, inundating much of Malé and
nearby islands which prompted Maldivian authorities to take global climatic
changes seriously. An INQUA research in 2003 found that actual sea levels in
the Maldives had dropped in the 1970s and forecasts little change in the next
century. There is also concern over the questionable shark fishing practices
in place in the island. Shark fishing is forbidden by law, but these laws are
not enforced. The population of sharks has sharply decreased in recent years.

The Asian brown cloud hovering in the atmosphere over the northern Indian
Ocean is also another concern. Studies show that decreased sunshine and
increased acid rain source from this cloud.

## Energy

While electricity in the Maldives has historically come entirely from diesel
generators, solar power has been increasingly adopted to avoid high fuel
costs. The resort on Dhiddhoofinolhu claims to have the world's largest
oceanic floating solar plant, with 678 kW enough to supply peak demand. The
country's Environment Ministry has deployed solar–battery–diesel hybrid
systems across the outer islands to reduce subsidies for imported diesel and
promote low-carbon energy independence.

## Poverty, income and gender inequality

Old street sellers in Malé

Maldives achieved their Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the
proportion of people living under the poverty line to 1% as of 2011.
Starvation is non-existent, HIV rates have fallen and malaria has been
eradicated. Despite these accomplishments and progressive economic growth,
developmental issues remain. In particular, the country needs to address
income and gender disparities. Development in Maldives has occurred
predominantly in the capital Malé; islands outside the capital continue to
encounter high poverty vulnerability, lower per-capita income, lower
employment and limited access to social services. A country-wide household
income survey in 1997-1998 showed that the average income in the capital Malé
was 75% higher than in surrounding islands. Maldives's Gini co-efficient
stands at 0.41.

### Poverty and Income Disparity

The factors that have led to Maldivians falling into or remaining in poverty
are:

  1. **Geography** : Residents of the northern regions of Maldives tend to remain in poverty more than other regions due to the relatively lower level of development in the North;
  2. **Health** : Maldivians who do not work due to poor health remain in poverty possibly on account of lower accessibility to health services in the country;
  3. **Young household members** : Larger proportion of young family members results in a lower overall household income;
  4. **Female household members** : Lower female labour participation rate and therefore, households with a greater proportion of females will have lower household income.

The difficulty of accessing social services and infrastructure in the outer
atolls has meant that geography is a key reason for poverty and income
disparity in Maldives. In islands far from the capital, there tends to be lack
of production, inadequate use of fishery resources, low value chain
development and insufficient credit for small-scale producers and
entrepreneurs. The scarcity of land and water, the underdeveloped farming
practices and absence of support services in atolls has meant low production
and thus low incomes in these regions.

### Current Efforts

The government has recognized these issues of income and gender disparities
and with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Maldives has
implemented policies that directly address these issues. In 2011, President
Nasheed said, "The most important facility for a country's development is its
people... and since women are half of the population in any country, for a
certainty their full participation will speed up the pace of development."