The **economy of Latvia** is an open economy in Europe and is part of the
European Single Market. Latvia is a member of the World Trade Organization
(WTO) since 1999, a member of the European Union since 2004, a member of the
Eurozone since 2014 and a member of the OECD since 2016. Latvia is ranked the
14th in the world by the Ease of Doing Business Index prepared by the World
Bank Group. According to the Human Development Report 2023/24 by the United
Nations Development Programme, has a HDI score of a 0.879 (2022 data). Due to
its geographical location, transit services are highly developed, along with
timber and wood processing, agriculture and food products, and manufacturing
of machinery and electronic devices.

Latvia's economy has had rapid GDP growth of more than 10% per year during
2006–07, but entered a severe recession in 2009 as a result of an
unsustainable current account deficit, collapse of the real estate market, and
large debt exposure amid the softening world economy. Triggered by the
collapse of Parex Bank, the second largest bank, GDP decreased by almost 18%
in 2009, and the European Union, the International Monetary Fund, and other
international donors provided substantial financial assistance to Latvia as
part of an agreement to defend the currency's peg to the euro in exchange for
the government's commitment to stringent austerity measures. In 2011 Latvia
achieved GDP growth by 5.5% and thus Latvia again was among the fastest
growing economies in the European Union. The IMF/EU program successfully
concluded in December 2011.

Privatization is mostly complete, except for some of the large state-owned
utilities. Export growth contributed to the economic recovery, however, the
bulk of the country's economic activity is in the services sector.

## Economic history

For centuries under Hanseatic and German influence and then during its inter-
war independence, Latvia used its geographic location as an important
east–west commercial and trading centre. Industry served local markets, while
timber, paper and agricultural products were Latvia's main exports.

Prior to World War I, Latvia was an advanced manufacturing hub within the
Russian Empire, primarily serving the Russian market. After attaining
independence in 1918, Latvia lost its status as an advanced manufacturing hub.
Latvia sought in the interwar period to become an international exporter of
food and to re-industrialize. Latvia experienced growth in GDP per capita
during the interwar period, although some economic historians have argued that
there was stagnation in the period of the authoritarian Karlis Ulmanis regime
(1934–1940).

After reestablishing its independence, Latvia proceeded with market-oriented
reforms, albeit at a measured pace. Its freely traded currency, the lat, was
introduced in 1993 and held steady, or appreciated, against major world
currencies. Inflation was reduced from 958.6% in 1992 to 25% by 1995 and 1.4%
by 2002.

After contracting substantially between 1991 and 1995, the economy steadied in
late 1994, led by a recovery in light industry and a boom in commerce and
finance. This recovery was interrupted twice, first by a banking crisis and
the bankruptcy of _Banka Baltija_ , Latvia's largest bank, in 1995 and second
by a severe crisis in the financial system of neighbouring Russia in 1998.
After 2000, Latvian GDP grew by 6–8% a year for 4 consecutive years. Latvia's
state budget was balanced in 1997 but the 1998 Russian financial crisis
resulted in large deficits, which were reduced from 4% of GDP in 1999 to 1.8%
in 2003. These deficits were smaller than in most of the other countries
joining the European Union in 2004.

Until the middle of 2008, Latvia had the fastest developing economy in Europe.
In 2003, GDP growth was 7.5% and inflation was 2.9%. The centrally planned
system of the Soviet period was replaced with a structure based on free-market
principles. In 2005, private sector share in GDP was 70%. Recovery in light
industry and Riga's emergence as a regional financial and commercial centre
offset shrinkage of the state-owned industrial sector and agriculture. The
official unemployment figure was held steady in the 7%–10% range.

### Economic contraction in 2008–2010

The 2008 financial crisis severely disrupted the Latvian economy, primarily as
a result of the easy credit bubble that began building up during 2004. The
bubble burst leading to a rapidly weakening economy, resulting in a budget,
wage and unemployment crisis. Latvia had the worst economic performance in
2009, with annual growth rate averaging −18%.

The Latvian economy entered a phase of fiscal contraction during the second
half of 2008 after an extended period of credit-based speculation and
unrealistic inflation of real estate values. The national account deficit for
2007, for example, represented more than 22% of the GDP for the year while
inflation was running at 10%. By 2009 unemployment rose to 23% and was the
highest in the EU.

Paul Krugman, the Nobel Laureate in economics for 2008, wrote in his _New York
Times_ Op-Ed column for 15 December 2008:

_"The acutest problems are on Europe's periphery, where many smaller economies
are experiencing crises strongly reminiscent of past crises in Latin America
and Asia: Latvia is the new Argentina"._

By August 2009, Latvia's GDP had fallen by 20% year on year, with Standard &
Poor's predicting a further 16% contraction to come. The International
Monetary Fund suggested a devaluation of Latvia's currency, but the European
Union objected to this, on the grounds that the majority of Latvia's debt was
denominated in foreign currencies. Financial economist Michael Hudson has
advocated for redenominating foreign currency liabilities in Latvian lats
before devaluing.

However, by 2010 there were indications that Latvia's policy of internal
devaluation was successful.

### Economic recovery 2010–2012

The economic situation has since 2010 improved, and by 2012 Latvia was
described as a success by IMF managing director Christine Lagarde showing
strong growth forecasts. The Latvian economy grew by 5.5% in 2011 and by 5.6%
in 2012 reaching the highest rate of growth in Europe. The GDP surpassed the
pre-crisis level in 2018.

### Economic issues 2022-23

The Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 caused some economic problems
in Latvia. Real GDP growth slowed to 2.8 percent in 2022 from 4.3 percent in
2021. Russia was a major trade partner and EU sanctions impacted this.
Dramatic rises in the cost of energy, the need to seek alternative sources of
gas and oil as well as logistics issues resulted in inflation averaging 17.2%
in 2022 before falling back to single digits in 2023.

## Privatisation

Privatisation in Latvia is almost complete. Virtually all of the previously
state-owned small and medium companies have been privatized, leaving only a
small number of politically sensitive large state companies. In particular,
the country's main energy and utility company, Latvenergo remains state-owned
and there are no plans to privatize it. The government also holds minority
shares in Ventspils Nafta oil transit company and the country's main telecom
company Lattelecom but it plans to relinquish its shares in the near future.

Foreign investment in Latvia is still modest compared with the levels in
north-central Europe. A law expanding the scope for selling land, including
land sales to foreigners, was passed in 1997. Representing 10.2% of Latvia's
total foreign direct investment, American companies invested $127 million in
1999. In the same year, the United States exported $58.2 million of goods and
services to Latvia and imported $87.9 million. Eager to join Western economic
institutions like the World Trade Organization, OECD, and the European Union,
Latvia signed a Europe Agreement with the EU in 1995 with a 4-year transition
period. Latvia and the United States have signed treaties on investment,
trade, and intellectual property protection and avoidance of double taxation.

## Employment

Employed-unemployed in Latvia in workforce 15–74 years old (thousand people)
1996-2017 and chain-linked GDP reference year 2010 (bln EUR) Data: Statistics
Latvia

0510-0593

0594-0676

0677-0759

0760-0842

0843-0925

0926-1008

1009-1091

1092-1170

Average monthly gross wages in cities under state jurisdiction and counties
(in euro) 2017. Excluding private sector enterprises with number of employees
< 50\. Data: Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia

Average wages are higher in Riga and Ventspils and their surroundings, with
inland border regions lagging behind, mainly the region of Latgale.

## Sectors

### Primary

#### Agriculture

Latvia produced in 2018:

  * 1.4 million tons of wheat;
  * 426 thousand tons of potato;
  * 306 thousand tons of barley;
  * 229 thousand tons of rapeseed;
  * 188 thousand tons of oat;
  * 81 thousand tons of rye;
  * 80 thousand tons of bean;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

### Manufacturing

  * Ogres Knitwear, since 1965

### Services

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Latvia
is Services with 71,692 companies followed by Retail Trade and Finance,
Insurance, and Real Estate with 15,300 and 10,287 companies respectively.

## Corporations

### Most valuable companies

Largest Latvian companies by valuation (EUR € billions) according to Prudentia
and Nasdaq Riga (2024).

Rank | Name | Headquarters | Valuation  
(bil. €) | Industry  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
01  | Swedbank Baltics, AS | Riga | 4.345  | Banking  
02  | Latvenergo, AS | Riga | 4.024  | Energy  
03  | Latvijas valsts meži [lv], AS | Riga | 1.657  | Forestry  
04  | Mikrotīkls, SIA | Riga | 0.992  | Network equipment  
05  | Maxima Latvija, SIA | Riga | 0.816  | Retail  
07  | SEB banka, AS | Valdlauči [lv] | 0.590  | Banking  
08  | Latvijas Mobilais Telefons, SIA | Riga | 0.560  | Telecommunications  
09  | Citadele Banka, AS | Riga | 0.507  | Banking  
010  | Rimi Latvia, SIA | Riga | 0.499  | Retail  
011  | Tele2, SIA | Riga | 0.425  | Telecommunications  
012  | Elko Grupa, AS | Riga | 0.402  | Wholesale of electronics  
  
## Infrastructure

### Energy

Pļaviņas Hydroelectric Power Station Real GPD per capita development of
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania

Most of Latvian electricity is produced with Hydroelectricity. The largest
hydroelectric power stations are Pļaviņas Hydroelectric Power Station, Riga
Hydroelectric Power Plant and Ķegums Hydroelectric Power Station.

In 2017 about 4381 GWh were produced in hydro power and 150 GWh in wind power.
There are plans to increase Wind electricity production under the 2021-2030
energy plan.

Latvia used to import 100% of its natural gas from Russia, until its import
was banned in January 2023.

### Transport

Key ports are located in Riga (Freeport of Riga and Riga Passenger Terminal),
Ventspils (Free port of Ventspils), and Liepāja (Port of Liepāja). Most
transit traffic uses these and half the cargo is crude oil and oil products.

Latvian Railways is the main state-owned railway company in Latvia. Its
daughter companies both carry out passengers services as well as carry a large
quantity of freight cargo, and freight trains operate over the whole current
passenger network, and a number of lines currently closed to passenger
services.

Riga International Airport is the only major airport in Latvia, carrying
around 5 million passengers annually. It is the largest airport in the Baltic
states and has direct flights to over 80 destinations in 30 countries. It is
also the main hub of airBaltic.