GNI per capita:  

Slovenia ($23,520)

Higher GNI per capita compared to Slovenia

Lower GNI per capita compared to Slovenia

The economy of Slovenia is a developed mixed economy. The country maintains a
high quality of life and economic stability as well as above-average GDP per
capita by purchasing power parity at 91% of the EU average in 2023. The
nominal GDP in 2023 is 68.108 billion USD, nominal GDP per capita (GDP/pc) in
2023 is USD 32,350. The highest GDP per capita is in central Slovenia, where
the capital city Ljubljana is located. It is part of the Western Slovenia
statistical region, which has a higher GDP per capita than eastern Slovenia.

In 2007, Slovenia became the first former Yugoslav republic to join the
European Union, adopting the euro currency within the Eurozone. It has also
been a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
since 2010. Slovenia has a highly educated workforce, well-developed
infrastructure, and is situated at a major transport crossroads. Almost two-
thirds of the working population is employed in services. The level of foreign
direct investment (FDI) is one of the lowest in Europe but has seen steady
gains since the mid-2010s. The Slovenian economy was heavily impacted by the
European economic crisis of the late 2000s. In 2013, GDP per capita began
rising again.

## History

Slovenia comprised approximately one-eleventh of Yugoslavia's total
population, it was the most productive of the Yugoslav republics, accounting
for one-fifth of its GDP and one-third of its exports. Slovenia thus gained
independence in 1991 with an already relatively prosperous economy and strong
market ties to the West.

Since that time it has vigorously pursued diversification of its trade with
the West and integration into Western and transatlantic institutions. Slovenia
is a founding member of the World Trade Organization, joined CEFTA in 1996,
and joined the European Union on 1 May 2004. In June 2004 it joined the
European Exchange Rate Mechanism. The euro was introduced at the beginning of
2007 and circulated alongside the tolar until 14 January 2007. Slovenia also
participates in SECI (Southeast European Cooperation Initiative), as well as
in the Central European Initiative, the Royaumont Process, and the Black Sea
Economic Council.

During the Great Recession, the Slovenian economy suffered a severe setback.
In 2009 the Slovenian GDP per capita shrank by 7.9%. After a slow recovery
from the 2009 recession, thanks to exports, the economy of Slovenia again slid
into recession in the last quarter of 2011. This has been attributed to the
fall in domestic consumption and the slowdown in the growth of exports.
Slovenia mainly exports to countries of the eurozone. The reasons for the
decrease in domestic consumption have been multiple: fiscal austerity, the
freeze in budget expenditure in the final months of 2011, a failure in the
efforts to implement economic reforms, inappropriate financing, and the
decrease in exports. In addition, the construction industry was severely hit
in 2010 and 2011. From 2014 onwards GDP of Slovenia is rising again. The main
factors of GDP growth are export and in the year 2016 also domestic
consumption, which started to revive after the economic crisis. The GDP growth
in 2015 was 2.3%; in the first half of 2016 it was 2.5%, and in the 2nd
quarter of 2016 it was 2.7%. This means that GDP growth accelerated in 2016.

During the EU accession negotiations, Slovenia insisted on numerous
derogations, refusing to open up certain key sectors of the economy to full
competition. The country is the only one in Central and Eastern Europe to have
retained control of its banking sector. The country has also preserved an
important public service built during the socialist period: Slovenia still has
one of the best healthcare systems in the world, and education is free up to
the postgraduate level.

## Trade

Slovenia's trade is orientated towards other EU countries, mainly Germany and
Italy. This is the result of a wholesale reorientation of trade toward the
West and the growing markets of central and eastern Europe in the face of the
collapse of its Yugoslav markets. Slovenia's economy is highly dependent on
foreign trade. Trade equals about 120% of GDP (exports and imports
combined).[_clarification needed_] About two-thirds of Slovenia's trade is
with other EU members.

This high level of openness makes it extremely sensitive to economic
conditions in its main trading partners and changes in its international price
competitiveness. However, despite the economic slowdown in Europe in 2001–03,
Slovenia maintained a 3% GDP growth. Keeping labour costs in line with
productivity is thus a key challenge for Slovenia's economic well-being, and
Slovenian firms have responded by specializing in mid- to high-tech
manufacturing. Industry and construction comprise about one-quarter of the
GDP. As in most industrial economies, services make up an increasing share of
output (57.1 percent), notably in financial services.

## Agriculture

The agricultural output of Slovenia in 2018:

  * 350,000 metric tons (390,000 short tons) of maize;
  * 126,000 metric tons (139,000 short tons) of grapes;
  * 121,000 metric tons (133,000 short tons) of wheat;
  * 88,000 metric tons (97,000 short tons) of barley;
  * 86,000 metric tons (95,000 short tons) of apples;
  * 72,000 metric tons (79,000 short tons) of potatoes,

in addition to smaller amounts of other agricultural products.

Neonicotinoids are commonly used as they are throughout the world, including
the use of thiacloprid in the country's apple orchards. Smodiš Škerl et al
(2009) found that thiacloprid/apple application practices leave a residue in
the pollen but not in bee bread.

## Economic performance

The historical primary industries of agriculture, forestry, and fishing
contribute a comparatively low 2.5 percent of GDP, and engage only 6 percent
of the population. The average farm is only 5.5 hectares. Part of Slovenia
lies in the Alpe-Adria bioregion, which is currently involved in a major
initiative in organic farming. Between 1998 and 2003, the organic sector grew
from less than 0.1% of Slovenian agriculture to roughly the European Union
average of 3.3%.

Public finances have shown a deficit in recent years. This averaged around
$650 million per annum between 1999 and 2007; however, this amounted to less
than 23 percent of GDP. There was a slight surplus in 2008 with revenues
totalling $23.16 billion and expenditures $22.93 billion. Government
expenditure equalled 38 percent of GDP.[_citation needed_] As of January
2011[update], the total national debt of Slovenia was unknown. The Statistical
Office of the Republic of Slovenia (SURS) reported it to be (not counting
state-guaranteed loans) 19.5 billion euros or 54.2% of GDP at the end of
September 2010. According to the data provided by the Slovenian Ministry of
Finance in January 2011, it was just below 15 billion euros or 41.6% of the
2009 GDP. However, the Slovenian financial newspaper Finance calculated in
January 2011 that it was actually 22.4 billion euros or almost 63% of GDP,
surpassing the limit of 60% allowed by the European Union. On 12 January 2011,
the Slovenian Court of Audit rejected the data reported by the ministry as
incorrect and demanded the dismissal of the finance minister Franc Križanič.

Slovenia's traditional anti-inflation policy relied heavily on capital inflow
restrictions. Its privatization process favoured insider purchasers and
prescribed a long lag time on share trading, complicated by a cultural
wariness of being "bought up" by foreigners. As such, Slovenia has had a
number of impediments to foreign participation in its economy. Slovenia has
garnered some notable foreign investments, including the investment of $125
million by Goodyear in 1997. At the end of 2008, there was around $11.5
billion of foreign capital in Slovenia. Slovenians had invested $7.5 billion
abroad. As of 31 December 2007, the value of shares listed on the Ljubljana
Stock Exchange was $29 billion.

Investments from neighboring Croatia have begun in Slovenia. On 1 July 2010,
Droga Kolinska was purchased by the Atlantic Group of Croatia for 382 million
euros. Mercator was sold to Croatia's Agrocor in June 2014.

At the end of the year 2014, there were 10 billion[_clarification needed_]
foreign direct investment in Slovenia, 13.9% more than at the end of the year
2013. In 2013 (latest published data) direct foreign investments accounted for
24.7% of the GDP of Slovenia. The most important investor countries are
Austria (33.6%), Switzerland (11.3%), Germany (10.4%), Italy (7.9%), and
Croatia (7.7%).

## Data

The following table shows the main economic indicators from 1993–2019.

Year  | GDP (in bil. US$ PPP)  | GDP (in bil. EUR PPP)  | GDP per capita (in EUR PPP)  | GDP (in bil. US$ nominal)  | GDP growth (real)  | Inflation (in Percent)  | Unemployment rate  | Government debt (in % of GDP)   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1993  | 23.5  | 7.8  | 3,908  | 16.6  | 2.8 %  | 31.9 %  | 8.6 %  | ...   
1995  | 26.9  | 10.6  | 8,311  | 21.4  | 4.1 %  | 13.7 %  | 7.0 %  | 18.2 %   
2000  | 35.8  | 18.9  | 11,076  | 20.4  | 3.7 %  | 8.9 %  | 6.7 %  | 25.9 %   
2005  | 47.8  | 29.1  | 14,551  | 36.3  | 3.8 %  | 2.5 %  | 6.5 %  | 26.4 %   
2006  | 52.2  | 31.5  | 15,676  | 39.5  | 5.7 %  | 2.5 %  | 6.0 %  | 26.1 %   
2007  | 57.3  | 35.1  | 17,373  | 48.1  | 7.0 %  | 3.7 %  | 4.9 %  | 22.8 %   
2008  | 60.5  | 37.9  | 18,757  | 55.8  | 3.5 %  | 5.7 %  | 4.4 %  | 21.8 %   
2009  | 56.2  | 36.3  | 17,758  | 50.5  | −7.5 %  | 0.8 %  | 5.1 %  | 34.5 %   
2010  | 57.7  | 36.4  | 17,749  | 48.2  | 1.3 %  | 1.8 %  | 5.4 %  | 38.3 %   
2011  | 59.4  | 37.1  | 18,052  | 51.6  | 0.9 %  | 1.8 %  | 7.1 %  | 46.5 %   
2012  | 59.7  | 36.3  | 17,626  | 46.6  | −2.6 %  | 2.6 %  | 8.5 %  | 53.6 %   
2013  | 61.7  | 36.5  | 17,700  | 48.4  | −1.0 %  | 1.8 %  | 11.1 %  | 70 %   
2014  | 63.7  | 37.6  | 18,253  | 50.0  | 2.8 %  | 0.2 %  | 10.8 %  | 80.3 %   
2015  | 65.3  | 38.9  | 18,830  | 43.1  | 2.2 %  | −0.5 %  | 9.8 %  | 82.6 %   
2016  | 70.1  | 40.4  | 19,589  | 44.8  | 3.2 %  | −0.1 %  | 8.9 %  | 78.5 %   
2017  | 75.8  | 43.0  | 20,820  | 48.6  | 4.8 %  | 1.4 %  | 7.8 %  | 74.1 %   
2018  | 81.1  | 45.9  | 22,136  | 54.2  | 4.4 %  | 1.7 %  | 5.9 %  | 70.3 %   
2019  | 85.4  | 48.4  | 23,167  | 54.4  | 3.3 %  | 1.6 %  | 4.8 %  | 65.6 %   
  
## Companies

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in
Slovenia is services with 60,260 companies followed by wholesale trade and
construction with 9,980 and 9,010 companies respectively.