| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. _( October 2022)_  
---|---  
| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Economy of Palau" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·**
scholar **·** JSTOR _( May 2019)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **economy ofPalau** consists primarily of tourism, fishing and subsistence
agriculture. The government is the major employer of the work force, relying
heavily on financial assistance from the United States. The population enjoys
a per capita income of more than twice that of the Philippines and much of
Micronesia. Long-term prospects for the tourist sector have been greatly
bolstered by the expansion of air travel in the Pacific and the rising
prosperity of leading East Asian countries.

Palau's per capita GDP of $17,000 makes it one of the wealthier Pacific Island
states. Nominal GDP increased by an annual average of nearly 14% from 1983 to
1990, and by an annual rate of over 10% from 1991 to 1997. Growth turned
sharply negative in 1998 and 1999 as a result of the 1997 Asian financial
crisis.

## Industries

Tourism is Palau's main industry. Activity focuses on scuba diving and
snorkeling among the islands' rich marine environment, including the Floating
Garden Islands to the west of Koror. Major scuba diving sites include German
Channel and Blue Corner. The number of visitors—85% of whom come from Japan,
Taiwan, and the U.S.—reached nearly 67,000 in 1997, more than quadruple the
level of a decade earlier. Tourism earned $67 million in foreign exchange for
Palau in 1996, (which is 1,000 dollars per person) accounting for roughly half
of GDP. Arrivals from Asian countries dropped in 1998 and 1999 due to the
regional economic downturn and the depreciation of many Asian currencies
against the dollar, which made Palau's dollar-denominated prices more
expensive.

The service sector dominates the Palauan economy, contributing more than 80%
of GDP and employing three-quarters of the work force. The government alone
employs nearly 30% of workers. One of the government's main responsibilities
is administering external assistance. Under the terms of the Compact of Free
Association with the United States, Palau will receive more than $450 million
in assistance over 15 years, $30 million per year, and is eligible to
participate in more than 40 federal programs. The first grant of $142 million
was made in 1994. Further annual payments in lesser amounts will be made
through 2009. U.S. grants in 1999 totaled $24 million.

Construction is the most important industrial activity, contributing over 9%
of GDP. Several large infrastructure projects, including the rebuilding of the
bridge connecting Koror and Babeldaob Islands after its collapse in 1996 and
the construction of a highway around the rim of Babeldaob, boosted activity at
the end of the 1990s.

Agriculture is mainly on a subsistence level, the principal crops being
coconuts, root crops, and bananas. Fishing is a potential source of revenue,
but the islands' tuna output dropped by over one-third during the 1990s.

There are no Patent Laws in Palau. Gazetteer – Patents Archived 2018-09-26 at
the Wayback Machine

## Economic challenges

The main economic challenge confronting Palau is to ensure the long-term
viability of its economy by reducing its reliance on foreign assistance. Palau
has created a trust fund to be drawn upon after the cessation of Compact
grants, the value of which had grown to $140 million by the beginning of 2009.
Also, in the late 1990s, Palau was affected by the 1997 Asian Financial
Crisis, and their economy suffered. The island took a huge hit during the
COVID-19 pandemic with global travel restrictions putting tourism to a halt.
The Asian Development Bank projects that the GDP of Palau contracted by 9.5%
in 2020.

Historically, the United States has provided substantial assistance to Palau.
Japan and Taiwan have provided funding for infrastructure projects in Palau.

## Tourism challenges

In order to tackle mass tourism, the Palau Legacy Project, a sustainable
tourism body, created a visa policy for the island of Palau to protect the
nation from environmental damage. The "Palau Pledge" was the most awarded
campaign of 2018 according to the WARC Creative 100 index.

## Economic statistics

### Income

**Gross Domestic Product (GDP)** : purchasing power parity – $132 million
(2009 est.) (GDP estimate includes U.S. subsidy)

**GDP – real growth rate** : 1% (2009 est.)

**GDP – per capita** : purchasing power parity – $8 500 (2009 est.)

**GDP – composition by sector**

  * _agriculture_ : N/A
  * _industry_ : N/A
  * _services_ : N/A

**Population below poverty line** : N/A

**Household income or consumption by percentage share**

  * _lowest 10%_ : N/A
  * _highest 10%_ : N/A

### Inflation

**Inflation rate (consumer prices)** : 3.4% (2000 est.)

### Workforce

**Labor force** : 10 200 (2000)

**Labor force – by occupation**

  * _Agriculture_ : 20%
  * _Industry_ : N/A
  * _Services_ : N/A

(1990)

**Unemployment rate** : 4.2% (2000 est.)

### Budget

  * _Revenues_ : $57.81 million
  * _Expenditures_ : $80.8 million, including capital expenditures of $17.1 million (FY 98/99 est.)

### Industries

Dominant industries include tourism, craft items (from shell, wood, pearls),
construction, and garment making.

**Industrial production growth rate** : N/A

### Electricity

**Electricity – production** : 200 MWh (1996)

**Electricity – production by source**

  * _Fossil fuels_ : 85%
  * _Hydro_ : 15%
  * _Nuclear_ : 0%
  * _Other_ : 0%

(1996)

**Electricity – consumption** : 200 MWh (1996)

**Electricity – exports** : 0 kWh (1996)

**Electricity – imports** : 0 kWh (1996)

### Trade

**Agriculture – products** : coconuts, copra, cassava (tapioca), sweet
potatoes

**Exports** : $18 million (f.o.b., 2001)

**Exports – commodities** : trochus (type of shellfish), tuna, copra,
handicrafts

**Exports – partners** : Japan 70.1%, South Korea 15.1% United States 7.1%
(2019)

**Imports** : $99 million (f.o.b., 2001 est.)

**Imports – commodities** : machinery and equipment, fuels, metals, foodstuffs

**Imports – partners** : South Korea 18.7%, China 18.2%, Taiwan 16.9%, United
States 16.5%, Japan 16%, (2019)

### Debt and aid

**Debt – external** : $18.4 Billion (2014 estimate). Palau ranks as one of the
countries with the highest external debt as a share of GDP.

**Economic aid – recipient** : $155.8 million. Note: the Compact of Free
Association with the U.S., entered into after the end of the UN trusteeship on
1 October 1994, provides Palau with up to $700 million in U.S. aid over 15
years in return for furnishing military facilities.