The government of the Marshall Islands is the largest employer, employing
30.6% of the work force, down by 3.4% since 1988. GDP is derived mainly from
payments made by the United States under the terms of the amended Compact of
Free Association. Direct U.S. aid accounted for 60% of the Marshall Islands'
$90 million budget.

The main economic activities in the Marshall Islands are copra production and
fisheries. Under the terms of the Compact of Free Association, Marshallese
citizens can travel and work in the United States without visas, which has
contributed to more than a 22% population decline over the period 2000–2021.

The Marshall Islands has no central bank. The official currency of the
Marshall Islands is the US Dollar.

President Donald Trump announced a 10% tariff on the Marshall Islands on 2
April 2025.

## Subsistence economy

The subsistence economy consists of fishing and breadfruit, banana, taro, and
pandanus cultivation. On the outer islands, production of copra and
handicrafts provide cash income. The modern service-oriented economy is
located in Majuro and Ebeye. It is sustained by government expenditures and
the U.S. Army installation at Kwajalein Atoll. The airfield there also serves
as a second national hub for international flights.

## Modern economy

The modern sector consists of wholesale and retail trade; restaurants; banking
and insurance; offshore companies registration; construction, repair, and
professional services; and copra processing. Company formation in the Marshall
Islands is available for residents and non-residents. Non-residents enjoy
privacy benefits and zero local taxes. Copra cake and oil are by far the
nation's largest exports. A tuna processing plant employs 300 workers, mostly
women, at $1.50 per hour. Copra production, the most important single
commercial activity for the past 100 years, now depends on government
subsidies. The subsidies, more a social policy than an economic strategy, help
reduce migration from outer atolls to densely populated Majuro and Ebeye.

Marine resources, including fishing, aquaculture, tourism development, and
agriculture, are top government development priorities. The Marshall Islands
sells fishing rights to other nations as a source of income. In recent years,
the Marshall Islands has begun to offer ship registrations under the Marshall
Islands flag. As a small nation, the Marshall Islands must import a wide
variety of goods, including foodstuffs, consumer goods, machinery, and
petroleum products.

Marshall Islands has signed a bilateral trade agreement with Taiwan in 2019,
this agreement has been approved in 2023 and will take effect at a future
date.

## Coconut oil

Power authorities, private companies, and entrepreneurs are experimenting with
coconut oil as an alternative to diesel fuel for vehicles, power generators,
and ships. Coconut trees abound in the Pacific's tropical islands. One liter
of oil can be produced from the copra of 6–10 coconuts.

## Digital currency

In February 2018, the Marshallese government enacted the Sovereign Currency
Act of 2018 to develop a national digital currency, the Marshallese Sovereign
(SOV), that would reduce the country's dependence on the U.S. dollar. The SOV
plan prompted a vote of no confidence in President Hilda Heine, who was in
favour of the scheme, in November 2018, which failed when parliament
deadlocked on the question.

The SOV is intended to serve as a second legal tender for the Marshall
Islands, alongside the U.S. dollar; however, the International Monetary Fund
has stated that it does not meet the definition of a central bank digital
currency. The IMF also raised concerns about macroeconomic and financial
integrity risks associated with the digital currency. Despite the objections
of the IMF, the U.S. Treasury Department, and banks, the Marshallese
government has continued to work toward the development of the SOV. The
country is using Algorand open-source blockchain technology for the SOV
ledger.

## Gross domestic product

**GDP:** purchasing power parity - $150 million (2011 est.)

**GDP - real growth rate:** 3% (2011 est.)

**GDP - per capita:** purchasing power parity - $2 500 (2011 est.)

**GDP - composition by sector:**  
_agriculture:_ 22%  
_industry:_ 18%  
_services:_ 60% (2008)

The islands have few natural resources, and their imports far exceed exports.
According to the CIA, the value of exports in 2013 was approximately $53.7
million while estimated imports were $133.7 million. Agricultural products
include coconuts, tomatoes, melons, taro, breadfruit, fruits, pigs and
chickens. Industry is made up of the production of copra and craft items, tuna
processing and tourism. The CIA estimates that the GDP in 2016 was an
estimated $180 million, with a real growth rate of 1.7% while the GDP per
capita was $3,300.

## Marshall Island productivity

**Population below poverty line:** NA%

**Household income or consumption by percentage share:**  
_lowest 10%:_ NA%  
_highest 10%:_ NA%

**Inflation rate (consumer prices):** 5% (2007)

**Labor force:** NA

**Labor force - by occupation:** agriculture 48%, industry 12%, services 40%
(2008)

**Unemployment rate:** 8% (2011 est.)

**Budget:**  
_revenues:_ $169.5 million  
_expenditures:_ $112.1 million, including capital expenditures of $19.5
million (FY08/09 est.)

**Industries:** copra, fish, tourism, craft items from shell, wood, and
pearls, offshore banking (embryonic)

**Industrial production growth rate:** NA%

**Electricity - production:** 114 GWh (2008)

**Electricity - production by source:**  
_fossil fuel:_ NA%  
_hydro:_ NA%  
_nuclear:_ NA%  
_other:_ NA%

**Electricity - consumption:** 57 GWh (1994)

**Electricity - exports:** 0 kWh (1994)

**Electricity - imports:** 0 kWh (1994)

**Agriculture - products:** coconuts, cacao, taro, breadfruit, fruits; pigs,
chickens

**Exports:** $132 million (f.o.b., 2008 est.)

**Exports - commodities:** fish, coconut oil, trochus shells

**Exports - partners:** United States, Japan, Australia, New Zealand

**Imports:** $125 million (f.o.b., 2008 est.)

**Imports - commodities:** foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, fuels,
beverages and tobacco

**Imports - partners:** United States, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Guam,
Singapore

**Debt - external:** $68 million (2008 est.)

**Economic aid - recipient:** approximately $40 million annually from the US

**Currency:** 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

**Exchange rates:** US currency is used

**Fiscal year:** 1 October - 30 September