| Parts of this article (those related to Infobox economy) need to be
**updated**. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly
available information.  
Last update: 2015 _( January 2025)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy of the Czech Republic** is a developed export-oriented social
market economy based in services, manufacturing, and innovation that maintains
a high-income welfare state and the European social model. The Czech Republic
participates in the European Single Market as a member of the European Union,
and is therefore a part of the economy of the European Union. It uses its own
currency, the Czech koruna, instead of the euro. It is a member of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The Czech
Republic ranks 16th in inequality-adjusted human development and 24th in World
Bank Human Capital Index, ahead of countries such as the United States, the
United Kingdom or France. In 2019 it was described by _The Guardian_ as "one
of Europe's most flourishing economies", but in 2023 as "sick man of Europe"
by Die Welt.

The industry sector accounts for 37% of the economy, while services account
for 61% and agriculture for 2%. The principal industries are high tech
engineering, electronics and machine-building, steel production,
transportation equipment (automotive, rail and aerospace industry), chemicals,
advanced materials and pharmaceuticals. The major services are research and
development, ICT and software development, nanotechnology and life sciences.
Its main agricultural products are cereals, vegetable oils and hops.

As of 2023,[update] the Czech GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is
$50,961 and 698,706 Czech crowns ($31,368) at nominal value. As of September
2021,[update] the unemployment rate in the Czech Republic was the lowest in
the EU at 2.6%, and the poverty rate is the second lowest of OECD members,
following Denmark. The Czech Republic ranks 21st in the Index of Economic
Freedom (ranked behind Chile), 30th in the Global Innovation Index (ranked
behind UAE), 32nd in the Global Competitiveness Report, 41st in the ease of
doing business index and 25th in the Global Enabling Trade Report (ranked
behind Canada). The largest trading partner for both export and import is
Germany, followed by other members of the EU. The Czech Republic has a highly
diverse economy that ranks 7th in the 2019 Economic Complexity Index.

## History

### From industrialisation to communism (1800-1989)

The Czech lands were among the first industrialized countries in continental
Europe during the German Confederation era. The Czech industrial tradition
dates back to the 19th century, when the Lands of the Bohemian Crown were the
economic and industrial heartland of the Austrian Empire and later the
Austrian side of Austria-Hungary. The Czech lands produced a majority (about
70%) of all industrial goods in the Empire, some of which were almost
monopolistic.

After the First World War, the Austrian-Hungarian Empire collapsed and
independent Czechoslovakia was created. Czechoslovakia had way too big
industrial production for a small internal market and it missed the big market
of the former Empire. The Czechoslovak crown was introduced in April 1919 at a
1:1 ratio to the Austro-Hungarian currency, it became one of the most stable
currencies in Europe.[_citation needed_] It is a widespread myth among Czechs
that the First Republic belonged to the 10 most developed economies of the
world. In fact it had the 14th highest GDP per capita in the world. The Czech
part (without Slovakia and Transcarpathia) had a similar GDP in the 1920s to
Germany and Belgium, which was higher than that of the crisis-struck Austrian
First Republic.

The consequences of the 1938 Munich Agreement and subsequent Nazi Germany
occupation were disastrous for the economy. After the occupation and forced
subordination of the economy to Nazi German economic interests, the crown was
officially pegged to the mark at a ratio of 1:10, even though the unofficial
exchange rate was 1 to 6-7 and Germans immediately started buying Czech goods
in large quantities.

After the World War II and the Communist Coup d'état were all the economies of
the socialist countries tightly linked to that of the Soviet Union, in
accordance with Stalin's development policy of planned interdependence.
Czechoslovakia was the most prosperous country in the Eastern Bloc, however it
was during the decades overtaken not only by Austria or Finland but also
Southern European economies like that of Italy, Spain or Greece.

Czech National Bank headquarters in Prague Heavy industry such as steelmaking
is a traditional part of the Czech economy. Transportation equipment,
machinery manufacturing and engineering are essential for the Czech economy.

### 1989–1995

The "Velvet Revolution" in 1989, offered a chance for profound and sustained
political and economic reform. With the disintegration of the communist
economic alliance in 1991, Czech manufacturers lost their traditional markets
among former communist countries in the east. Signs of economic resurgence
began to appear in the wake of the shock therapy that the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) labelled the "_big bang_ " of January 1991. Since then,
consistent liberalization and astute economic management has led to the
removal of 95% of all price controls, low unemployment, a positive balance of
payments position, a stable exchange rate, a shift of exports from former
communist economic bloc markets to Western Europe, and relatively low foreign
debt. Inflation has been higher than in some other countries – mostly in the
10% range – and the government has run consistent modest budget
deficits.[_citation needed_]

Two government priorities have been strict fiscal policies and creating a good
climate for incoming investment in the republic. Following a series of
currency devaluations, the crown has remained stable in relation to the US
dollar.[_citation needed_] The Czech crown became fully convertible for most
business purposes in late 1995.

In order to stimulate the economy and attract foreign partners, the government
has revamped the legal and administrative structure governing investment. With
the breakup of the Soviet Union, the country, till that point highly dependent
on exports to the USSR, had to make a radical shift in economic outlook: away
from the East, and towards the West. This necessitated the restructuring of
existing banking and telecommunications facilities, as well as adjusting
commercial laws and practices to fit Western standards. Further minimizing
reliance on a single major partner, successive Czech governments have welcomed
U.S. investment (amongst others) as a counterbalance to the strong economic
influence of Western European partners, especially of their powerful
neighbour, Germany. Although foreign direct investment (FDI) runs in uneven
cycles, with a 12.9% share of total FDI between 1990 and March 1998, the U.S.
was the third-largest foreign investor in the Czech economy, behind Germany
and the Netherlands.

The country boasts a flourishing consumer production sector and has privatized
most state-owned heavy industries through the voucher privatization system.
Under the system, every citizen was given the opportunity to buy, for a
moderate price, a book of vouchers that represents potential shares in any
state-owned company. The voucher holders could then invest their vouchers,
increasing the capital base of the chosen company, and creating a nation of
citizen share-holders. This is in contrast to Russian privatization, which
consisted of sales of communal assets to private companies rather than share-
transfer to citizens. The effect of this policy has been dramatic. Under
communism, state ownership of businesses was estimated to be 97%.[_citation
needed_] Privatization through restitution of real estate to the former owners
was largely completed in 1992. By 1998, more than 80% of enterprises were in
private hands. Now completed,[_citation needed_] the program has made Czechs,
who own shares of each of the Czech companies, one of the highest per-capita
share owners in the world.[_citation needed_] On the other hand, by the public
is the voucher privatisation seen mostly as unfair and source of corruption.

### 1995–2000

Škoda Auto is the largest automobile manufacturer in the Czech Republic.

The country's economic transformation was far from complete. Political and
financial crises in 1997 shattered the Czech Republic's image as one of the
most stable and prosperous of post-Communist states. Delays in enterprise
restructuring and failure to develop a well-functioning capital market played
major roles in Czech economic troubles, which culminated in a currency crisis
in May. The formerly pegged currency was forced into a floating system as
investors sold their Korunas faster than the government could buy them. This
followed a worldwide trend to divest from developing countries that year.
Investors also worried the republic's economic transformation was far from
complete. Another complicating factor was the current account deficit, which
reached nearly 8% of GDP.

In response to the crisis, two austerity packages were introduced later in the
spring (called vernacularly "The Packages"), which cut government spending by
2.5% of GDP. Growth dropped to 0.3% in 1997, −2.3% in 1998, and −0.5% in 1999.
The government established a restructuring agency in 1999 and launched a
revitalization program – to spur the sale of firms to foreign companies. Key
priorities included accelerating legislative convergence with EU norms,
restructuring enterprises, and privatising banks and utilities. The economy,
fueled by increased export growth and investment, was expected to recover by
2000.

### 2000–2005

Growth in 2000–05 was supported by exports to the EU, primarily to Germany,
and a strong recovery of foreign and domestic investment. Domestic demand is
playing an ever more important role in underpinning growth as interest rates
drop and the availability of credit cards and mortgages increases. Current
account deficits of around 5% of GDP are beginning to decline as demand for
Czech products in the European Union increases. Inflation is under control.
Recent accession to the EU gives further impetus and direction to structural
reform. In early 2004 the government passed increases in the Value Added Tax
(VAT) and tightened eligibility for social benefits with the intention to
bring the public finance gap down to 4% of GDP by 2006, but more difficult
pension and healthcare reforms will have to wait until after the next
elections. Privatization of the state-owned telecommunications firm Český
Telecom took place in 2005. Intensified restructuring among large enterprises,
improvements in the financial sector, and effective use of available EU funds
should strengthen output growth.

### 2005–2010

Growth continued in the first years of the EU membership. The credit portion
of the 2008 financial crisis did not affect the Czech Republic much, mostly
due to its stable banking sector which has learned its lessons during a
smaller crisis in the late 1990s and became much more cautious. As a fraction
of the GDP, the Czech public debt is among the smallest ones in Central and
Eastern Europe. Moreover, unlike many other post-communist countries, an
overwhelming majority of the household debt – over 99% – is denominated in the
local Czech currency. That's why the country wasn't affected by the shrunken
money supply in the U.S. dollars.

However, as a large exporter, the economy was sensitive to the decrease of the
demand in Germany and other trading partners. In the middle of 2009, the
annual drop of the GDP for 2009 was estimated around 3% or 4.3%, a relatively
modest decrease. The impact of the economic crisis may have been limited by
the existence of the national currency that temporarily weakened in H1 of
2009, simplifying the life of the exporters. The Czech Republic has a well-
educated population and a densely developed infrastructure.

### 2010–2019

Smartwings is the major Czech airline holding company with subsidies including
the Czech Airlines.

Due to the Great Recession, Czech Republic was in stagnation or decreasing of
GDP. Some commenters and economists criticising fiscally conservative policy
of Petr Nečas' right-wing government, especially criticising ex-minister of
finance, Miroslav Kalousek. Miroslav Kalousek in a 2008 interview, as minister
of finance in the center-right government of Mirek Topolánek, said "Czech
Republic will not suffer by financial crisis". In September 2008, Miroslav
Kalousek formed state budget with projection of 5% GDP increase in 2009. In
2009 and 2010, Czech Republic suffered strong economical crisis and GDP
decreased by 4,5%. From 2009 to 2012, Czech Republic suffered highest state
budget deficits in history of independent Czech Republic. From 2008 to 2012,
the public debt of Czech Republic increased by 18,9%. Most decrease of
industrial output was in construction industry (-25% in 2009, -15,5% in 2013).
From 4Q 2009 to 1Q 2013, GDP decreased by 7,8%.

In 2012, Czech government increased VAT. Basic VAT was increased from 20% in
2012 to 21% in 2013 and reduced VAT increased from 14% to 15% in 2013. Small
enterprises sales decreased by 21% from 2012 to 2013 as result of increasing
VAT. Patria.cz predicting sales stagnation and mild increase in 2013. Another
problem is foreign trade. The Czech Republic is considered an export economy
(the Czech Republic has strong machinery and automobile industries), however
in 2013, foreign trade rapidly decreased which led to many other problems and
increase of state budget deficit. In 2013, Czech National Bank, central bank,
implemented controversial monetary step. To increase export and employment,
CNB wilfully deflated Czech Crown (CZK), which inflation increased from 0.2%
in November 2013, to 1.3% in 1Q 2014.

In 2014, GDP in the Czech Republic increased by 2% and is predicted to
increase by 2.7% in 2015. In 2015, Czech Republic's economy grew by 4,2% and
it's the fastest growing economy in the European Union. On 29 May 2015, it was
announced that growth of the Czech economy has increased from calculated 3,9%
to 4,2%.

Cybersecurity software company Avast had its IPO on the Prague Stock Exchange
and the London Stock Exchange in 2018. The information and communications
technology (ICT) and software development is a major sector of the Czech
economy.

In August 2015, Czech GDP growth was 4.4%, making the Czech economy the
highest growing in Europe. On 9 November 2015, unemployment in the Czech
Republic was at 5.9%, the lowest number since February 2009. On the other
hand, the economy suffers from dividends being paid to the foreign owners of
Czech companies (in 2016 worth CZK 289 billion). It is seen as a hurdle to
catching up with the Western European economies and as a reason for salaries
being only a third of neighbouring Germany or Austria. In 2019 it was
described by _The Guardian_ as "one of Europe's most flourishing economies"

### 2020-present

The worldwide COVID-19 pandemic in the early 2020s as well as the European
energy crisis caused by the Russian full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022 hit
the Czech economy hard. In 2023, the conservative German newspaper Die Welt
called Czechia "Europe's sick man" as it was the only country not to
economically recover from the pandemic trap. Furthermore, the newspaper
highlighting the danger of Czechia being stuck in the middle-income trap,
although it is labelled as high-income country by the World Bank since 2006.

## Adoption of Euro and EU funds

Since its accession to the European Union in 2004, the Czech Republic has
adopted the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union and it is bound
by the Treaty of Accession 2003 to adopt the Euro currency in the future.

Although the Czech Republic is economically well positioned to adopt the euro,
following the European debt crisis there has been considerable opposition
among the public adoption of the euro currency. There is no target date by the
government for joining the ERM II or adopting the euro. The cabinet that was
formed following the 2017 legislative election did not plan to proceed with
euro adoption within its term, and this policy was continued by the succeeding
cabinet formed after the 2021 election. However, by the start of 2024,
President Petr Pavel called on the government to take concrete steps in
adopting the euro.

The Czech Republic also receives €24.2bn between 2014 and 2020 from the
European Structural and Investment Funds, however, this sum does not outweigh
the amount of capital outflow of profits of foreign owned firms from the Czech
Republic into other EU members, at which the funds are aimed to compensate
for.

## Public policy

Ministry of Industry and Trade | This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( August 2017)_  
---|---  
  
Social policy in the Czech Republic addresses issues such as healthcare,
education, social welfare, housing and pensions. The government provides
social assistance and benefits to vulnerable groups, including the elderly,
disabled, and unemployed. These social safety nets help protect individuals
and families against income loss and social risks.

The Czech Republic has elements of the European social model in its welfare
system and social policies. However, there are some aspect, where the Czech
Republic differs from the model.

The Czech Republic provides universal access to healthcare, and healthcare
services are predominantly financed through compulsory health insurance
contributions. The country has a well-developed healthcare system that aims to
provide essential medical care to all citizens.

The Czech Republic has labor market regulations in place to protect workers'
rights, ensure fair wages, and promote job security. However, labor market
flexibility has increased in recent years, and the country has undertaken
labor market reforms to enhance competitiveness.

As of 2016, the Czech Republic has the second lowest poverty rate of OECD
members only behind Denmark. The Czech healthcare system ranks 13th in the
2016 Euro health consumer index.

## Prague Stock Exchange

Prague Stock Exchange

The Czech economy also includes its capital market. In the case of the Czech
Republic, it is the Prague Stock Exchange (PSE). (PSE). The Prague Stock
Exchange is governed by the Capital Market Business Act and the stock exchange
rules it sets itself. All of its activities are controlled by the Czech
National Bank. The Vienna Stock Exchange is the majority shareholder of the
Prague Stock Exchange.

The Prague Stock Exchange has four main markets:

  * Prime Market - a market for trading the largest and most prestigious issues of shares of Czech and foreign companies (the market capitalization of the company should exceed EUR 1 million)
  * Standard Market - a market designed for trading large and prestigious issues of shares of Czech and foreign companies (Market Capitalization of the company should exceed EUR 1 million)
  * Free Market - a market admits to trading both investment instruments for which the issuer has requested admission to trading and investment instruments traded on other world exchanges which are admitted to trading without the issuer's consent
  * START Market - a market for smaller innovative companies (Small and Medium Enterprises) that wish to raise new capital or whose owners wish to partially or wholly exit their existing business to capitalise their existing operations

The largest issue traded on the Prague Stock Exchange is the energy company
ČEZ. The main activity of ČEZ is the sale of electricity, mainly generated
from its own sources, and the related provision of support services to the
electricity system. Other large issues on the Prague Stock Exchange's Prime
Market include banking houses - Komerční banka, MONETA Money Bank and the dual
listing of the Austrian company Erste Group Bank, under which the local bank
Česká spořitelna falls; as well as Colt CZ Group focusing mainly on the
production of firearms (traded on the Prague Stock Exchange from 2020). From
the Standard market, the largest issue is Philip Morris ČR, the largest
manufacturer and seller of tobacco products in the Czech Republic. On the
START market, we find, for example, e-commerce companies Bezvavlasy and
Pilulka Lékárny, leather manufacturer and processor KARO Leather or urban
furniture manufacturer mmcité.

## Energy

In Czech Republic energy production is diverse, with a mix of nuclear, coal,
natural gas, and renewable sources. Nuclear power plays a significant role,
while efforts to increase renewable usage are underway. The country aims to
balance energy security, environmental concerns and sustainability in its
energy policies. National objectives are to cut gas emissions by 40 percent by
2030 (compared with 1990) and to construct one nuclear reactor at the current
Dukovany NPP site by late 2030s.

The Czech energy sector is largely built around two large nuclear plants and
several smaller conventional coal power plants. Nuclear and coal power plants
provide primarily baseload power at a high level of utilization, while gas
fired units, reservoir hydro and pumped storage provide flexible generation.
Recent rises in costs of carbon credits have made coal power plants almost
financially inviable.

in 2022, Czech gross electricity production reached 78.8 terawatt-hours (TWh),
while domestic consumption was around 60.4 TWh. The Czech energy mix was made
up of 53.60 percent fossil fuels (47.50 percent lignite, 5.86 percent natural
gas, etc.), 40.95 percent nuclear power, and 5.46 percent renewables (3.34
percent biomass, 1.47 percent solar, 0.63 percent water, etc.). The first
green hydrogen electrolyzer powered by solar energy in the Czech Republic
started in May 2023 with production capacity of about 100 kilograms per day /
8,000 kilograms of green hydrogen per year.

While the goal of EU funds is to support a sustainable low-carbon-emission
economy and ensure energy security by utilizing alternative energies, the
Czech approach is different. As described in the State Energy Policy, the
future Czech energy mix will be primarily based on nuclear power with a goal
of reaching 50 percent of the energy supply. Due to EU regulations, the share
of coal energy will decrease but be largely replaced by both one (and possibly
more) large nuclear reactors. The deployment of a series of small modular
reactors is also under consideration by the Czechs. The share of alternative
energies will grow but its potential for becoming the backbone of the energy
sector is unclear.

## Statistical indicators

Real GPD per capita development the Czech Republic 1970 to 2018 Percentage of
GDP growth in the Czech Republic 1997–2019 Credit ratings by Standard & Poor's
Average gross wage in the Czech Republic (1990–2015) EU by GNI per capita, PPP
(current international $). World Bank 2016

### Development of main indicators

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2017. Inflation
under 2% is in green.

Year  | GDP  
(in Bil. US$ PPP) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$ nominal) | GDP growth  
(real) | Inflation rate  
(in Percent) | Unemployment   
(in Percent) | Government debt  
(in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
2015  | 340.6  | 32,318  | 209.1  | 5.3 %  | 0.3 %  | 5.0 %  | 40.0 %   
2016  | 353.9  | 33,529  | 229.6  | 2.6 %  | 0.7 %  | 3.9 %  | 36.8 %   
2017  | 375.7  | 35,512  | 208.9  | 4.3 %  | 2.4 %  | 2.9 %  | 34.7 %   
2018  | 397.7  | 37,547  | 211.7  | 3.5 %  | 2.3 %  | 3.0 %  | 32.9 %   
2019  | 418.7  | 39,478  | 209.4  | 3.0 %  | 2.0 %  | 3.2 %  | 31.3 %   
2020  | 437.7  | 41,220  | 188.0  | 2.5 %  | 2.0 %  | 3.4 %  | 29.4 %   
  
### Background

_From theCIA World Factbook 2017_ **GDP (pp.):** $353.9 billion (2016) **GDP
(nom.):** $195.3 billion (2016) **GDP Growth:** 2.6% (2016) **GDP per capita
(pp.):** $33,500 (2016) **GDP per capita (nom.):** $18,487 (2016) **GDP by
sector:** _Agriculture:_ 2.5% _Industry:_ 37.5% _Services:_ 60% (2016)
**Inflation:** 0.7% (2016) **Labour Force:** 5.427 million (2017)
**Unemployment:** 2,3% (September 2018)

**Industrial production growth rate:** 3.5% (2016)

**Household income or consumption by percentage share:** (2015)

  * _lowest 10%:_ 4.1%
  * _highest 10%:_ 21.7%

**Public Debt:** 34.2% GDP (2018)

### Trade and finance

**Exports:** $136.1 billion _Export goods:_ machinery and transport equipment,
raw materials, fuel, chemicals (2018)

**Imports:** $122.8 billion _Import goods:_ machinery and transport equipment,
raw materials and fuels, chemicals (2018) **Current Account balance:** $2.216
billion (2018) **Export partners:** Germany 32.4%, Slovakia 8.4%, Poland 5.8%,
UK 5.2%, France 5.2%, Italy 4.3%, Austria 4.2% (2016) **Import partners:**
Germany 30.6%, Poland 9.6%, China 7.5%, Slovakia 6.3%, Netherlands 5.3%, Italy
4.1% (2016) **Reserves:** $85.73 billion (31 December 2016) **Foreign Direct
Investment:** $139.6 billion (31 December 2016) **Czech Investment Abroad:**
$43.09 billion (31 December 2016) **External debt:** $138 billion (31 December
2016) **Value of Publicly Traded Shares:** $44.5 billion (31 December 2016)

**Exchange rates:**

  * _koruny (Kč) per US$1_ – 21.82 Kč (September 2018), 18.75 (December 2010), 18.277 (2007), 23.957 (2005), 25.7 (2004), 28.2 (2003), 32.7 (2002), 38.0 (2001), 38.6 (2001), 34.6 (1999), 32.3 (1998), 31.7 (1997), 27.1 (1996), 26.5 (1995)
  * _koruny (Kč) per EUR€1_ – 27.33 (May 2015), 25.06 (December 2010)

### IT and Telecommunications

**Households with access to fixed and mobile telephone access**

  * _landline telephone_ – 25% (2009) 
    * according to the Czech Statistical Office: 55,2% (2005); 31,1% (2008); 27,6% (2009); 24,2% (2010); 23,4% (2011); 21,8% (2012)
  * _mobile telephone_ – 94% (2009) 
    * according to the Czech Statistical Office: 81,2% (2005); 92,4% (2008); 94,6% (2009); 95,6% (2010); 96,2% (2011); 97,0% (2012)

**Individuals with mobile telephone access**

  * according to the Czech Statistical Office: 75,8% (2005); 90,6% (2009); 93,9% (2011); 96,0% (2012); 96,0% (2013)

**Broadband penetration rate**

  * _fixed broadband_ – 19.1% (2010)
  * _mobile broadband_ – 3.5% (2010)

**Individuals using computer and internet**

  * _computer_ – 67% (2009) 
    * according to the Czech Statistical Office: 42,0% (2005); 59,2% (2009); 64,1% (2010); 67,1% (2011); 69,5% (2012); 70,2% (2013)
  * _internet_ – 80.9% (2019) 
    * according to the Czech Statistical Office: 32,1% (2005); 55,9% (2009); 61,8% (2010); 65,5% (2011); 69,5% (2012); 70,4% (2013)

### Companies

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Czech
Republic is Services with 295,538 companies followed by Finance, Insurance,
and Real Estate and Wholesale Trade with 189,308 and 95,142 companies
respectively.

## International rankings

### Society and quality of life

Index of Economic Freedom 2018

  * 32nd in Human Development Index (2022)
  * 18th in inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (2022)
  * 6th in Henley Passport Index (2024)
  * 24th in Human Capital Index (2018)
  * 16th in Quality of Nationality Index (Henley & Partners, 2018)
  * 27th in Legatum Prosperity Index (2019)
  * 22nd in Social Progress Index (2019)

### Macroeconomics

  * 41st in Ease of doing business index (2019)
  * 7th in Economic Complexity Index (2018)
  * 26th in Global Competitiveness Report (2022)
  * 25th in Global Enabling Trade Report (2016)
  * 24th in Global Innovation Index (2019)
  * 21st in Index of Economic Freedom (2018)