The United Kingdom has a highly developed social market economy. From 2017 to
2025 it has been the sixth-largest national economy in the world measured by
nominal gross domestic product (GDP), tenth-largest by purchasing power parity
(PPP), and about 18th by nominal GDP per capita, constituting 2.4% of world
GDP and 2.2% by purchasing power parity (PPP).

The United Kingdom has one of the most globalised economies and comprises
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. In 2022, the United Kingdom was
the fifth-largest exporter of goods and services in the world and the fourth-
largest importer. It also had the fourth-largest outward foreign direct
investment, and the fifteenth-largest inward foreign direct investment. In
2022, the United Kingdom's trade with the European Union accounted for 42% of
the country's exports and 48% of its total imports. The United Kingdom has a
highly efficient and strong social security system, which comprises roughly
24.5% of GDP.

The service sector dominates, contributing 82% of GDP; the financial services
industry is particularly important, and London is the second-largest financial
centre in the world. Edinburgh was ranked 17th in the world, and 6th in Europe
for its financial services industry in 2021. The United Kingdom's technology
sector is valued at US$1 trillion, third behind the United States and China.
The aerospace industry in the United Kingdom is the second-largest national
aerospace industry. Its pharmaceutical industry, the tenth-largest in the
world, plays an important role in the economy. Of the world's 500 largest
companies, 17 are headquartered in the UK. The economy is boosted by North Sea
oil and gas production; its reserves were estimated at 2.5 billion barrels in
2021, although it has been a net importer of oil since 2005. There are
significant regional variations in prosperity, with South East England and
North East Scotland being the richest areas per capita. The size of London's
economy makes it the wealthiest city by GDP per capita in Europe. In 2022, the
UK spent around 2.8% of GDP on research and development.

In the 18th century, Britain was the first nation to industrialise. During the
19th century, through its expansive colonial empire and technological
superiority, Britain had a preeminent role in the global economy, accounting
for 9.1% of the world's GDP in 1870. The Second Industrial Revolution was also
taking place rapidly in the United States and the German Empire; this
presented an increasing economic challenge for the UK, leading into the 20th
century. The cost of fighting both the First and Second World Wars further
weakened the UK's relative position. Despite a relative decline in its global
dominance, in the 21st century the UK retains the ability to project
significant power and influence around the world. During the Great Recession
of 2008, the UK economy suffered a significant decline, followed by a period
of weak growth.

Government involvement is primarily exercised by His Majesty's Treasury,
headed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the Department for Business and
Trade. Since 1979, management of the economy has followed a broadly laissez-
faire approach. The Bank of England is the UK's central bank, and since 1997
its Monetary Policy Committee has been responsible for setting interest rates,
quantitative easing, and forward guidance.

## History

### 1945 to 1979

The WWII net losses in British national wealth amounted to 18.6% (£4.595
billion) of the prewar wealth (£24.68 billion), at 1938 prices. After the
Second World War, a new Labour government fully nationalised the Bank of
England, civil aviation, telephone networks, railways, gas, electricity, and
the coal, iron and steel industries, affecting 2.3 million workers. Post-war,
the United Kingdom enjoyed a long period without a major recession; there was
a rapid growth in prosperity in the 1950s and 1960s, with unemployment staying
low and not exceeding 3.5% until the early 1970s. The annual rate of growth
between 1960 and 1973 averaged 2.9%, although this figure was far behind some
other European countries such as France, West Germany and Italy.

Deindustrialisation meant the closure of operations in mining, heavy industry,
and manufacturing, resulting in the loss of highly paid working-class jobs.
The UK's share of manufacturing output had risen from 9.5% in 1830 during the
Industrial Revolution to 22.9% in the 1870s. It fell to 13.6% by 1913, 10.7%
by 1938, and 4.9% by 1973. Overseas competition, lack of innovation, trade
unionism, the welfare state, loss of the British Empire, and cultural
attitudes have all been put forward as explanations. It reached crisis point
in the 1970s against the backdrop of a worldwide energy crisis, high
inflation, and a dramatic influx of low-cost manufactured goods from Asia.

During the 1973 oil crisis (which saw oil prices quadruple), the 1973–74 stock
market crash, and the secondary banking crisis of 1973–75, the British economy
fell into the 1973–75 recession and the government of Edward Heath was ousted
by the Labour Party under Harold Wilson, which had previously governed from
1964 to 1970. Wilson formed a minority government in March 1974 after the
general election on 28 February ended in a hung parliament. Wilson secured a
three-seat overall majority in a second election in October that year. The UK
recorded weaker growth than many other European nations in the 1970s; even
after the recession, the economy was blighted by rising unemployment and
double-digit inflation, which exceeded 20% more than once and was rarely below
10% after 1973.

In 1976, the UK was forced to apply for a loan of £2.3 billion from the
International Monetary Fund. Denis Healey, then Chancellor of the Exchequer,
was required to implement public spending cuts and other economic reforms in
order to secure the loan, and for a while the British economy improved, with
growth of 4.3% in early 1979. Following the discovery of large North Sea oil
reserves, the UK became a net exporter of oil by the end of the 1970s, which
contributed to a massive appreciation of the pound, making exports in general
more expensive and imports cheaper. Oil prices doubled between 1979 and 1980,
further reducing manufacturing profitability. After the Winter of Discontent,
when the UK was hit by numerous public sector strikes, the government of James
Callaghan lost a vote of no confidence in March 1979. This triggered the
general election on 3 May 1979 which resulted in Margaret Thatcher's
Conservative Party forming a new government. In retrospect, the 1970s is
considered to have been a "lost decade" for Britain economically (as well as
culturally).

### 1979 to 1997

A new period of neo-liberal economics began with this election. During the
1980s, many state-owned industries and utilities were privatised, taxes cut,
trade union reforms passed and markets deregulated. GDP fell by 5.9%
initially, but growth subsequently returned and rose to an annual rate of 5%
at its peak in 1988, one of the highest rates of any country in Europe.

Thatcher's modernisation of the economy was far from trouble-free; her battle
with inflation, which in 1980 had risen to 21.9%, resulted in a substantial
increase in unemployment from 5.3% in 1979 to over 10.4% by the start of 1982,
peaking at nearly 11.9% in 1984 – a level not seen in Britain since the Great
Depression. The rise in unemployment coincided with the early 1980s global
recession, after which UK GDP did not reach its pre-recession rate until 1983.
In spite of this, Thatcher was re-elected in June 1983 with a landslide
majority. Inflation had fallen to 3.7%, while interest rates were relatively
high at 9.56%. The increase in unemployment was largely due to the
government's economic policy which resulted in the closure of outdated
factories and coal pits. Manufacturing in England and Wales declined from
around 38% of jobs in 1961 to around 22% in 1981. This trend continued for
most of the 1980s, with newer industries and the service sector enjoying
significant growth. Many jobs were also lost as manufacturing became more
efficient and fewer people were required to work in the sector. Unemployment
had fallen below 3 million by the time of Thatcher's third successive election
victory in June 1987; and by the end of 1989 it was down to 1.6 million.

Britain's economy slid into another global recession in late 1990; it shrank
by a total of 6% from peak to trough, and unemployment increased from around
6.9% in spring 1990 to nearly 10.7% by the end of 1993. However, inflation
dropped from 10.9% in 1990 to 1.3% three years later. The subsequent economic
recovery was extremely strong, and unlike after the early 1980s recession, the
recovery saw a rapid and substantial fall in unemployment, which was down to
7.2% by 1997, although the popularity of the Conservative government had
failed to improve with the economic upturn. The government won a fourth
successive election in 1992 under John Major, who had succeeded Thatcher in
November 1990, but soon afterwards came Black Wednesday, which damaged the
Conservative government's reputation for economic competence, and from that
stage onwards, the Labour Party was ascendant in the opinion polls,
particularly in the immediate aftermath of Tony Blair's election as party
leader in July 1994 after the sudden death of his predecessor John Smith.

Despite two recessions, wages grew consistently by around 2% per year in real
terms from 1980 until 1997, and continued to grow until 2008.

### 1997 to 2009

In May 1997, Labour, led by Tony Blair, won the general election after 18
years of Conservative government. The Labour Government inherited a strong
economy with low inflation, falling unemployment, and a current account
surplus. Blair ran on a platform of New Labour which was characterised largely
by the continuation of neo-liberal economic policies, but also supporting a
strong welfare state. In Britain it was largely viewed as a combination of
socialist and capitalist policies, being dubbed 'Third Way'. Four days after
the election, Gordon Brown, the new Chancellor of the Exchequer, gave the Bank
of England the freedom to control monetary policy, which until then had been
directed by the government.

During Blair's 10 years in office there were 40 successive quarters of
economic growth, lasting until the second quarter of 2008. GDP growth, which
had briefly reached 4% per year in the early 1990s, gently declining
thereafter, was relatively anaemic compared to prior decades, such as the 6.5%
per year peak in the early 1970s, although growth was smoother and more
consistent. Annual growth rates averaged 2.68% between 1992 and 2007, with the
finance sector accounting for a greater part than previously. The period saw
one of the highest GDP growth rates of any developed economy and the strongest
of any European nation. At the same time, household debt rose from £420
billion in 1994 to £1 trillion in 2004 and £1.46 trillion in 2008 – more than
the entire GDP of the UK.

This extended period of growth ended in Q2 of 2008 when the United Kingdom
entered the Great Recession brought about by the 2008 financial crisis. The UK
was particularly vulnerable to the crisis because its financial sector was the
most highly leveraged of any major economy. Beginning with the collapse of
Northern Rock, which was taken into public ownership in February 2008, other
banks had to be partly nationalised. The Royal Bank of Scotland Group, at its
peak the fifth-largest bank in the world by market capitalisation, was
effectively nationalised in October 2008. By mid-2009, HM Treasury had a
70.33% controlling shareholding in RBS, and a 43% shareholding, through the UK
Financial Investments Limited, in Lloyds Banking Group. The Great Recession,
as it came to be known, saw unemployment rise from just over 1.6 million in
January 2008 to nearly 2.5 million by October 2009.

In August 2008 the IMF warned that the country's outlook had worsened due to a
twin shock: financial turmoil and rising commodity prices. Both developments
harmed the UK more than most developed countries, as it obtained revenue from
exporting financial services while running deficits in goods and commodities,
including food. In 2007, the UK had the world's third largest current account
deficit, due mainly to a large deficit in manufactured goods. In May 2008, the
IMF advised the UK government to broaden the scope of fiscal policy to promote
external balance. The UK's output per hour worked was on a par with the
average for the "old" EU-15 countries.

### 2009 to 2020

In March 2009, the Bank of England (BoE) cut interest rates to a then-historic
low of 0.5% and began quantitative easing (QE) to boost lending and shore up
the economy. The UK exited the Great Recession in Q4 of 2009 having
experienced six consecutive quarters of negative growth, shrinking by 6.03%
from peak to trough, making it the longest recession since records began and
the deepest since World War II. Support for Labour slumped during the
recession, and the general election of 2010 resulted in a coalition government
being formed by the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats.

In 2011, household, financial, and business debts stood at 420% of GDP in the
UK. As the world's most indebted country, spending and investment were held
back after the recession, creating economic malaise. However, it was
recognised that government borrowing, which rose from 52% to 76% of GDP, had
helped to avoid a 1930s-style depression. Within three years of the general
election, government cuts aimed at reducing the budget deficit had led to
public sector job losses well into six figures, but the private sector enjoyed
strong jobs growth.

The ten years following the Great Recession were characterised by extremes. In
2015, employment was at its highest since records began, and GDP growth had
become the fastest in the Group of Seven (G7) and Europe, but workforce
productivity was the worst since the 1820s, with any growth attributed to a
fall in working hours. Output per hour worked was 18% below the average for
the rest of the G7. Real wage growth was the worst since the 1860s, and the
Governor of the Bank of England described it as a lost decade. Wages fell by
10% in real terms in the eight years to 2016, whilst they grew across the OECD
by an average of 6.7%. For 2015 as a whole, the current account deficit rose
to a record high of 5.2% of GDP (£96.2bn), the highest in the developed world.
In Q4 2015, it exceeded 7%, a level not witnessed during peacetime since
records began in 1772. The UK relied on foreign investors to plug the
shortfall in its balance of payments. Homes had become less affordable, a
problem exacerbated by QE, without which house prices would have fallen by
22%, according to the BoE's own analysis.

A rise in unsecured household debt added to questions over the sustainability
of the economic recovery in 2016. The BoE insisted there was no cause for
alarm, despite having said two years earlier that the recovery was "neither
balanced nor sustainable". Following the UK's 2016 decision to leave the
European Union, the BoE cut interest rates to a new historic low of 0.25% for
just over a year. It also increased the amount of QE since the start of the
Great Recession to £435bn. By Q4 2018 net borrowing in the UK was the highest
in the OECD at 5% of GDP. Households had been in deficit for an unprecedented
nine quarters in a row. Since the Great Recession, the country was no longer
making a profit on its foreign investments. The Great Recession had a long
term effect on UK's growth; GDP growth slowed from an annual average of 3.0%
between 1993 and 2007 to 1.5% between 2009 and 2023, while labour productivity
growth slowed from an annual average of 1.9% between 1993 and 2008 to 0.4%
between 2008 and 2023. As of early 2024, average wages in the UK adjusted by
inflation are roughly the same as in 2008.

### 2020 to present

In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, a temporary ban was
imposed on non-essential business and travel in the UK. The BoE cut the
interest rate to 0.1%. Economic growth had been weak before the crisis, with
zero growth in Q4 2019. By May, 23% of the British workforce was furloughed
(temporarily laid off). Government schemes were launched to help affected
workers. In the first half of 2020, GDP shrank by 22.6%, the deepest recession
in UK history and worse than any other G7 or European country. During 2020 the
BoE purchased £450 billion of government bonds, taking the amount of
quantitative easing since the start of the Great Recession to £895 billion.
Overall, GDP shrank by 9.9% in 2020, making it the worst contraction since the
Great Frost paralysed the economy in 1709.

In 2021 consumer price inflation (CPI) began rising sharply due to higher
energy and transport costs. With annual inflation approaching 11%, the BoE
gradually increased the base rate to 2.25% during the first nine months of
2022. The UK was not alone: global inflation rates were the highest in 40
years owing to the pandemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine, though as of
September 2022[update], the country had the highest domestic electricity
prices and amongst the highest gas prices in Europe, contributing to a cost of
living crisis. In February 2022 the BoE began quantitative tightening (a
reversal of QE) by not renewing mature government bonds and in November
started offloading bonds to private investors, signalling the end to an era of
easy borrowing. In October 2022 year-on-year CPI was at 11.1%, the worst for
41 years, food price inflation was 16.2%, gas prices 130% and electricity 66%.

In August 2023, the ONS revised its analysis of Britain's economic performance
and said that Britain's GDP had surpassed its pre-COVID-19 size in the final
quarter of 2021, a much earlier recovery from the pandemic than previously
estimated and ahead of other big European countries. The British economy was
0.6% larger in the fourth quarter of 2021 than in the final quarter of 2019,
compared with an earlier estimate that it was 1.2% smaller. The new Labour
government elected in summer 2024 implemented the most significant enhancement
of employment regulations in a generation. This included an increase in
minimum wages and a wide array of rights.

## Economic charts

  * GDP year-on-year growth, 1949–2020

  * Workforce distribution in Great Britain 1841–1911, and in England and Wales 1921–2011

  * Unemployment rates, 1881–2017

  * Recovery periods for each recession (measured as GDP per capita), 1920–2009

  * Productivity, 1971–2019

  * Interest rates, 1800–2020

  * Balance of trade, 1948–2020

  * Balance of trade in crude oil and petroleum, 1890–2015

  * United Kingdom bonds inverted yield curve 1988–1991

## Government spending and economic management

The Bank of England, London

Government involvement in the economy is primarily exercised by HM Treasury,
headed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. In recent years, the UK economy has
been managed in accordance with principles of market liberalisation and low
taxation and regulation. Since 1997, the Bank of England's Monetary Policy
Committee, headed by the Governor of the Bank of England, has been responsible
for setting interest rates at the level necessary to achieve the overall
inflation target for the economy that is set by the Chancellor each year. The
Scottish Government, subject to the approval of the Scottish Parliament, has
the power to vary the basic rate of income tax payable in Scotland by plus or
minus 3 pence in the pound, though this power has not yet been exercised.

In the 20-year period from 1986/87 to 2006/07 government spending in the UK
averaged around 40% of GDP. In July 2007, the UK had government debt at 35.5%
of GDP. As a result of the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession,
government spending increased to a historically high level of 48% of GDP in
2009–10, partly as a result of the cost of a series of bank bailouts. In terms
of net government debt as a percentage of GDP, at the end of June 2014 public
sector net debt excluding financial sector interventions was £1304.6 billion,
equivalent to 77.3% of GDP. For the financial year of 2013–2014 public sector
net borrowing was £93.7 billion. This was £13.0 billion higher than in the
financial year of 2012–2013.

Taxation in the United Kingdom may involve payments to at least two different
levels of government: local government and central government (HM Revenue &
Customs). Local government is financed by grants from central government
funds, business rates, council tax, and, increasingly, fees and charges such
as those from on-street parking. Central government revenues are mainly from
income tax, national insurance contributions, value added tax, corporation tax
and fuel duty.

## Sectors

The UK's Office for National Statistics' Blue Book divides the UK economy into
10 broad categories, to list their contribution to the UK economy in terms of
Gross value added and employment income (as measured by employee
compensation). These are

Contributions to the UK economy by sector  Sector | GVA (£M) | % of GVA | Employee compensation (£M) | % of employee compensation   
---|---|---|---|---  
Agriculture | 16,206 | 0.8 | 4,887 | 0.4   
Production | 259,522 | 12.7 | 143,992 | 12.5   
Construction | 119,920 | 5.9 | 53,142 | 4.6   
Distribution | 335,709 | 16.4 | 235,682 | 20.4   
Information | 131,244 | 6.4 | 87,369 | 7.6   
Financial | 185,434 | 9.1 | 87,738 | 7.6   
Real Estate | 266,136 | 13.0 | 18,011 | 1.6   
Professional | 264,877 | 12.9 | 176,238 | 15.2   
Government (including health and education) | 405,455 | 19.8 | 313,594 | 27.1   
Other Services | 62,133 | 3.0 | 35,499 | 3.1   
  
### Agriculture

Agriculture in the UK is intensive, highly mechanised, and efficient by
European standards.

Agriculture in the UK is intensive, highly mechanised, and efficient by
European standards. The country produces around 65% of its food needs. The
self-sufficiency level was just under 50% in the 1950s, peaking at 80% in the
1980s, before declining to its present level at the turn of the 21st century.

Agriculture added gross value of £12.18 billion to the economy in 2018, and
around 467,000 people were employed in agriculture, hunting, forestry and
fishing. It contributes around 0.5% of the UK's national GDP. Around two-
thirds of production by value is devoted to livestock, and one-third to arable
crops. The agri-food sector as a whole (agriculture and food manufacturing,
wholesale, catering, and retail) was worth £120 billion and accounts for 4
million jobs in the UK.

### Construction

The construction industry of the United Kingdom employed around 2.3 million
people and contributed gross value of £123.2 billion to the economy in 2019.

One of the largest construction projects in the UK in recent years was
Crossrail, costing an estimated £19 billion. It was the largest construction
project in Europe. Opened in 2022, it is a new railway line running east to
west through London and into the surrounding area, with a branch to Heathrow
Airport. The main feature of the project is construction of 42 km (26 mi) of
new tunnels connecting stations in central London. High Speed 2 between London
and the West Midlands is one of Europe's largest infrastructure projects.
Crossrail 2 is a proposed rail route in the South East of England.

### Production industries

#### Electricity, gas and water

This sector added gross value of £51.4 billion to the economy in 2018. The
United Kingdom is expected to launch the building of new nuclear reactors to
replace existing generators and to boost the UK's energy reserves.

#### Manufacturing

A Rolls-Royce Trent 1000 jet engine made in the UK

In the 1970s, manufacturing accounted for 25 per cent of the economy. Total
employment in manufacturing fell from 7.1 million in 1979 to 4.5 million in
1992 and only 2.7 million in 2016, when it accounted for 10% of the economy.

In 2023, the manufacturing industry was worth £451.6 billion or $588 billion
to the UK economy, according to the office of national statistics.

Manufacturing has increased in 36 of the last 50 years and was twice in 2007
what it was in 1958.

In 2011, the UK manufacturing sector generated approximately £140.5 billion in
gross value added and employed around 2.6 million people. Of the approximately
£16 billion invested in R&D by UK businesses in 2008, approximately £12
billion was by manufacturing businesses. In 2008, the UK was the sixth-largest
manufacturer in the world measured by value of output.

In 2008, around 180,000 people in the UK were directly employed in the UK
automotive manufacturing sector. In that year the sector had a turnover of
£52.5 billion, generated £26.6 billion of exports and produced around 1.45
million passenger vehicles and 203,000 commercial vehicles. The UK is a major
centre for engine manufacturing, and in 2008 around 3.16 million engines were
produced in the country.

The aerospace industry of the UK is the second-largest aerospace industry in
the world (after the United States) and the largest in Europe. The industry
employs around 113,000 people directly and around 276,000 indirectly and has
an annual turnover of around £20 billion. British companies with a major
presence in the industry include BAE Systems and Rolls-Royce (the world's
second-largest aircraft engine maker). European aerospace companies active in
the UK include Airbus, whose commercial aircraft, space, helicopter and
defence divisions employ over 13,500 people across more than 25 UK sites.

The pharmaceutical industry employs around 67,000 people in the UK and in 2007
contributed £8.4 billion to the UK's GDP and invested a total of £3.9 billion
in research and development. In 2007 exports of pharmaceutical products from
the UK totalled £14.6 billion, creating a trade surplus in pharmaceutical
products of £4.3 billion. The UK is home to GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca,
respectively the world's third- and seventh-largest pharmaceutical companies.

#### Mining, quarrying and hydrocarbons

The Blue Book 2013 reports that this sector added gross value of £31.4 billion
to the UK economy in 2011. In 2007, the UK had a total energy output of 9.5
quadrillion Btus (10 exajoules), of which the composition was oil (38%),
natural gas (36%), coal (13%), nuclear (11%) and other renewables (2%). In
2009, the UK produced 1.5 million barrels per day (bbl/d) of oil and consumed
1.7 million bbl/d. Production is now in decline and the UK has been a net
importer of oil since 2005. As of 2010 the UK has around 3.1 billion barrels
of proven crude oil reserves, the largest of any EU member state.

In 2009, the UK was the 13th largest producer of natural gas in the world and
the largest producer in the EU. Production is now in decline and the UK has
been a net importer of natural gas since 2004. In 2009 the UK produced 19.7
million tons of coal and consumed 60.2 million tons. In 2005 it had proven
recoverable coal reserves of 171 million tons. It has been estimated that
identified onshore areas have the potential to produce between 7 billion
tonnes and 16 billion tonnes of coal through underground coal gasification
(UCG). Based on current UK coal consumption, these volumes represent reserves
that could last the UK between 200 and 400 years.

The UK is home to a number of large energy companies, including two of the six
oil and gas "supermajors" – BP and Shell plc. The UK is also rich in a number
of natural resources, including coal, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay,
chalk, gypsum, lead and silica.

### Service industries

The service sector is the dominant sector of the UK economy, and it accounted
for 82% of GDP in 2023.

#### Creative industries

The creative industries accounted for 7% of gross value added (GVA) in 2005
and grew at an average of 6% per annum between 1997 and 2005. Key areas
include London and the North West of England, which are the two largest
creative industry clusters in Europe. According to the British Fashion
Council, the fashion industry's contribution to the UK economy in 2014 is £26
billion, up from £21 billion in 2009. The UK is home to the world's largest
advertising company, WPP.

#### Education, health and social work

The Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham is a university hospital affiliated
with the University of Birmingham. It has the largest single-floor critical
care unit in the world.

According to The Blue Book 2013 the education sector added a gross value of
£84.6 billion in 2011 whilst human health and social work activities added
£104.0 billion in 2011.

In the UK the majority of the healthcare sector consists of the state funded
and operated National Health Service (NHS), which accounts for over 80% of all
healthcare spending in the UK and has a workforce of around 1.7 million,
making it the largest employer in Europe, and putting it amongst the largest
employers in the world. The NHS operates independently in each of the four
constituent countries of the UK. The NHS in England is by far the largest of
the four parts and had a turnover of £92.5 billion in 2008.

In 2007/08 higher education institutions in the UK had a total income of £23
billion and employed a total of 169,995 staff. In 2007/08 there were 2,306,000
higher education students in the UK (1,922,180 in England, 210,180 in
Scotland, 125,540 in Wales and 48,200 in Northern Ireland).

#### Financial and business services

The UK financial services industry added gross value of £116.4 billion to the
UK economy in 2011. The UK's exports of financial and business services make a
significant positive contribution towards the country's balance of payments.

Paternoster Square, home of the London Stock Exchange

London is a major centre for international business and commerce and is one of
the three "command centres" of the global economy (alongside New York City and
Tokyo).

There are over 500 banks with offices in London, and it is the leading
international centre for banking, insurance, Eurobonds, transactions in
foreign currencies and energy futures. London's financial services industry is
primarily based in the City of London and Canary Wharf. The City houses the
London Stock Exchange, the London Metal Exchange, Lloyd's of London, and the
Bank of England. Canary Wharf began development in the 1980s and is now home
to major financial institutions such as Barclays Bank, Citigroup and HSBC, as
well as the UK Financial Services Authority. London is also a major centre for
other business and professional services, and four of the six largest law
firms in the world are headquartered there.

Several other major UK cities have large financial sectors and related
services. Edinburgh has one of the largest financial centres in Europe and is
home to the headquarters of Lloyds Banking Group, NatWest Group and Standard
Life. Leeds is the UK's largest centre for business and financial services
outside London, and the largest centre for legal services in the UK after
London.

According to a series of research papers and reports published in the
mid-2010s, Britain's financial firms provide sophisticated methods to launder
billions of pounds annually, including money from the proceeds of corruption
around the world as well as the world's drug trade, thus making the city a
global hub for illicit finance. According to a Deutsche Bank study published
in March 2015, Britain was attracting circa one billion pounds of capital
inflows a month not recorded by official statistics, up to 40 per cent
probably originating from Russia, which implies misreporting by financial
institutions, sophisticated tax avoidance, and the UK's "safe-haven"
reputation.

#### Hotels and restaurants

The Blue Book 2013 reports that this industry added gross value of £36.6
billion to the UK economy in 2011. InterContinental Hotels Group (IHG),
headquartered in Denham, Buckinghamshire, is currently the world's largest
hotelier, owning and operating hotel brands such as InterContinental, Holiday
Inn and Crowne Plaza.

#### Informal

A study in 2014 found that sex work and associated services added over £5
billion to the economy each year.

#### Public administration and defence

The Blue Book 2013 reports that this sector added gross value of £70.4 billion
to the UK economy in 2011.

#### Real estate and renting activities

The Trafford Centre shopping complex in Manchester was sold for £1.6 billion
in 2011 in the largest property sale in British history.

Notable real estate companies in the United Kingdom include British Land,
Landsec and the Peel Group. The UK property market boomed for the seven years
up to 2008, and in some areas property trebled in value over that period. The
increase in property prices had a number of causes: low interest rates, credit
growth, economic growth, rapid growth in buy-to-let property investment,
foreign property investment in London and planning restrictions on the supply
of new housing.

In England and Wales between 1997 and 2016, average house prices increased by
259%, while earnings increased by 68%. An average home cost 3.6 times annual
earnings in 1997 compared to 7.6 in 2016. Rent has nearly doubled as a share
of GDP since 1985, and is now larger than the manufacturing sector. In 2014,
rent and imputed rent – an estimate of how much home-owners would pay if they
rented their home – accounted for 12.3% of GDP.

#### Tourism

The British Museum received 6.2 million visitors in 2019.

With over 40 million visits in 2019, inbound tourism contributed £28.5 billion
to the British economy, although just over half of that money was spent in
London, which was the third most visited city in the world (21.7 million),
behind second-placed Bangkok and first-placed Hong Kong.

The UK's 10 most significant inbound tourism markets in 2023:****

Rank  | Market  | Spend  | Visitors   
---|---|---|---  
1  | United States  | £6.3 billion  | 5,122,000   
2  | Germany  | £1.8 billion  | 2,957,000   
3  | France  | £1.6 billion  | 3,172,000   
4  | Australia  | £1.6 billion  | 1,169,000   
5  | Ireland  | £1.2 billion  | 2,889,000   
6  | Spain  | £1.1 billion  | 2,210,000   
7  | Netherlands  | £1.1 billion  | 1,960,000   
8  | Italy  | £973 million  | 1,696,000   
9  | Canada  | £970 million  | 1,003,000   
10  | United Arab Emirates  | £914 million  | 477,000   
  
##### Effects of the COVID-19 pandemic

The travel restrictions and lockdowns necessitated by the pandemic negatively
affected the entire hospitality/tourism section in 2020 with a 76% reduction
in "inbound tourism" to the UK that year according to VisitBritain. The
January 2021 forecast for the year indicated an estimate that visits from
other nations would be up "21% on 2020 but only 29% of the 2019 level". Some
increase was expected during 2021, slowly at first; the tourism authority
concluded that the number of visits was not expected to come "even close to
normal levels".

The same VisitBritain report also discussed the effects of the pandemic on
domestic travel within the UK in 2020, citing a significant reduction in
spending, for an estimated decline of 62% over the previous year. As of
January 2021, the forecast for the year suggested that spending would increase
by 79% over the previous year and that "the value of spending will be back to
84% of 2019 levels" by the end of 2021.

Some of the "COVID-19 restrictions" on domestic travel were to be loosened on
12 April 2021 and the UK planned to begin relaxing some restrictions on travel
from other nations in mid May. The latter plan became less certain as of 8
April 2021 when sources in the European Union stated on that a "third wave of
the pandemic [was sweeping] the continent"; the B117 variant was of particular
concern. Two days earlier, PM Boris Johnson had made it clear that "We don't
want to see the virus being reimported into this country from abroad". All
travel restrictions ended on 18 March 2022.

#### Transport, storage and communication

The East Coast Main Line (ECML) is a 393-mile long (632 km) high-speed line
between its southern terminus at London King's Cross station and Edinburgh
Waverley via Peterborough, Doncaster, York, Darlington, Durham and Newcastle.

The transport and storage industry added a gross value of £59.2 billion to the
UK economy in 2011 and the telecommunication industry added a gross value of
£25.1 billion in the same year.

The UK has a total road network of 246,700 miles (397,025 km) with 31,400
miles (50,533 km) of major roads, including 2,300 miles (3,701 km) of
motorway. The railway infrastructure, in Great Britain, is owned by Network
Rail which has 19,291 miles (31,046 km) of railway lines, of which 9,866 miles
(15,878 km) is open for traffic. There are a further 206.5 miles (332.3 km) of
track in Northern Ireland, owned and operated by Northern Ireland Railways.

The government is to spend £56 billion on a new high-speed railway line, HS2,
with the first phase from London to Birmingham costing £27 billion. Crossrail
(later branded the Elizabeth line), which was completed and officially opened
in 2022, is Europe's largest infrastructure project with a £15 billion
projected cost.

National Highways is the government-owned company responsible for trunk roads
and motorways in England apart from the privately owned and operated M6 Toll.

In the year from February 2017 to January 2018, UK airports handled a total of
284.8 million passengers. In that period the three largest airports were
London Heathrow Airport (78.0 million passengers), Gatwick Airport (45.6
million passengers) and Manchester Airport (27.8 million passengers).
Heathrow, located 14+1⁄2 miles (23.3 km) west of the capital, has the most
international passenger traffic of any airport in the world. It is the hub for
the UK flag carrier British Airways and Virgin Atlantic. London's six
commercial airports form the world's largest city airport system measured by
passenger traffic with 171 million passengers in 2017.

#### Wholesale and retail trade

This sector includes the motor trade, auto repairs, personal and household
goods industries. The Blue Book 2013 reports that this sector added gross
value of £151.8 billion to the UK economy in 2011.

As of 2016, high-street retail spending accounted for about 33% of consumer
spending and 20% of GDP. Because 75% of goods bought in the United Kingdom are
made overseas, the sector only accounts for 5.7% of gross value added to the
British economy. Online sales account for 22% of retail spending in the UK,
third highest in the world after China and South Korea, and double that of the
United States.

The UK grocery market is dominated by four companies: Tesco (26.9% market
share), Sainsbury's (14.8%), Asda (14.3%) and Morrisons (8.8%) in March 2023,
these supermarkets are known as the "Big Four". However discount supermarkets
such as Aldi and Lidl have grown in popularity, with Aldi's market share now
worth 9.9%.

London is a major retail centre and in 2010 had the highest non-food retail
sales of any city in the world, with a total spend of around £64.2 billion.
Outside of London, Manchester and Birmingham are also major retail
destinations, the UK is also home to many large out of town shopping centres
like Meadowhall, away from the main high streets in town and city centres.
Whilst the big international names dominate most towns and cities have streets
or areas with many often quirky independent businesses. The UK-based Tesco is
the fourth-largest retailer in Europe measured by turnover (after Swartz,
Aldi, and Carrefour in 2019).

## Currency

London is the world capital for foreign exchange trading, with a global market
share of 43.1% in 2019 of the daily $6.6 trillion global turnover. The highest
daily volume, counted in trillions of US dollars, is reached when New York
enters the trade.

Sterling is the currency of the UK, with its main unit, the pound, represented
by the symbol "£'. The Bank of England is the central bank, responsible for
issuing currency. Banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland retain the right to
issue their own notes, subject to retaining enough Bank of England notes in
reserve to cover the issue. Sterling is also used as a reserve currency by
other governments and institutions, and is the third-largest after the US
dollar and the euro.

The UK chose not to join the euro at the currency's launch. The government of
former Prime Minister Tony Blair had pledged to hold a referendum to decide on
membership should "five economic tests" be met. Until relatively recently
there had been debate over whether or not the UK should abolish its currency
and adopt the euro. In 2007 the Prime Minister, Gordon Brown, pledged to hold
a public referendum based on certain tests he set as Chancellor of the
Exchequer. When assessing the tests, Brown concluded that while the decision
was close, the United Kingdom should not yet join the euro. He ruled out
membership for the foreseeable future, saying that the decision not to join
had been right for the UK and for Europe. In particular, he cited fluctuations
in house prices as a barrier to immediate entry. Public opinion polls have
shown that a majority of Britons have been opposed to joining the single
currency for some considerable time, and this position has hardened further in
the last few years. In 2005, more than half (55%) of the UK were against
adopting the currency, while 30% were in favour. The possibility of joining
the euro has become a non-issue since the referendum decision to withdraw from
the European Union in 2016 and subsequent withdrawal in 2020.

### Exchange rates

Average for each year, in US dollars and euros per pound; and inversely: £ per
US$ and €. (Synthetic Euro XEU before 1999). These averages conceal wide
intra-year spreads. The coefficient of variation gives an indication of this.
It also shows the extent to which the pound tracks the euro or the dollar.
Note the effect of Black Wednesday in late 1992 by comparing the averages for
1992 and for 1993.

| Year  | £/US$  | US$/£  | C.var |  | £/XEU  | XEU/£ | C.var   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1990 | £0.5633 | $1.775 |  |  | £0.7161 | ₠1.397 |   
1991 | £0.5675 | $1.762 |  |  | £0.7022 | ₠1.424 |   
1992 | £0.5699 | $1.755 |  |  | £0.7365 | ₠1.358 |   
1993 | £0.6663 | $1.501 |  |  | £0.7795 | ₠1.283 |   
1994 | £0.6536 | $1.53 |  |  | £0.7742 | ₠1.292 |   
1995 | £0.6338 | $1.578 |  |  | £0.82 | ₠1.22 |   
1996 | £0.6411 | $1.56 |  |  | £0.8029 | ₠1.245 |   
1997 | £0.6106 | $1.638 |  |  | £0.6909 | ₠1.447 |   
1998 | £0.6037 | $1.656 |  |  | £0.6779 | ₠1.475 |   
1999 | £0.6185 | $1.617 |  |  | £0.6595 | €1.516 |   
2000 | £0.6609 | $1.513 |  |  | £0.6099 | €1.64 |   
2001 | £0.6943 | $1.44 |  |  | £0.6223 | €1.607 |   
2002 | £0.6664 | $1.501 |  |  | £0.6289 | €1.59 |   
2003 | £0.6123 | $1.633 |  |  | £0.6924 | €1.444 |   
2004 | £0.5461 | $1.832 | 2.26% |  | £0.6787 | €1.474 | 1.92%   
| Year  | £/US$  | US$/£  | C.var |  | £/€  | €/£ | C.var   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
2005 | £0.55 | $1.82 | 3.47% |  | £0.6842 | €1.462 | 1.27%   
2006 | £0.5435 | $1.842 | 3.79% |  | £0.6821 | €1.466 | 1.11%   
2007 | £0.4999 | $2.001 | 1.97% |  | £0.6848 | €1.461 | 2.4%   
2008 | £0.5499 | $1.835 |  |  | £0.7964 | €1.226 |   
2009 | £0.641 | $1.566 |  |  | £0.8914 | €1.123 |   
2010 | £0.6474 | $1.546 | 1.27% |  | £0.8586 | €1.166 | 3.83%   
2011 | £0.6231 | $1.605 | 3.81% |  | £0.8684 | €1.151 | 1.286%   
2012 | £0.6310 | $1.585 | 2.74% |  | £0.8112 | €1.233 | 0.712%   
2013 | £0.6650 | $1.503 | 5.17% |  | £0.8496 | €1.177 | 4.54%   
2014 | £0.6320 | $1.582 | 5.25% |  | £0.8060 | €1.240 | 5.35%   
2015 | £0.6810 | $1.468 | 7.20% |  | £0.7262 | €1.377 | 11.04%   
2016 | £0.770 | $1.299 |  |  | £0.8193 | €1.2242 |   
2017 | £0.808 | $1.238 |  |  | £0.8766 | €1.1414 |   
2018 | £0.750 | $1.333 |  |  | £0.885 | €1.1301 |   
2019 | £0.748 | $1.337 |  |  | £0.8773 | €1.1405 |   
  
    For consistency and comparison purposes, coefficient of variation is measured on both the "per £" ratios, although it is conventional to show the forex rates as dollars per £ and £ per euro.

## Economic variation within the United Kingdom

### Gross domestic product (2022)

Within the United Kingdom, England has the largest constituent economy
measured by gross domestic product (GDP) according to the figures provided by
the Office for National Statistics (ONS) for the year 2022, whilst Northern
Ireland has the smallest, which is also in line with their respective
population sizes. England also has the highest level of GDP per capita within
the UK, whilst Wales has the lowest.

Rank | Nation | Population | GDP (in millions of GBP) | GDP (in millions of USD) | Share of the UK total | GDP per capita (GBP) | GDP per capita (USD)   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1  |  England | 57 106 398  | 2 161 593  | 2 664 325  | 86.25%  | 37 852  | 46 655   
2  |  Scotland | 5 447 698  | 186 851  | 230 445  | 7.46%  | 34 299  | 42 301   
3  |  Wales | 3 131 640  | 85 412  | 105 337  | 3.41%  | 27 274  | 33 636   
4  |  Northern Ireland | 1 910 543  | 56 694  | 69 813  | 2.26%  | 29 674  | 36 541   
United Kingdom (total)  | 67 596 279  | 2 506 170  | 3 089 072  | 100%  | 37 076  | 45 758   
  
#### By English region

England constitutes the vast majority of the total UK population (84.3%) and
an even larger proportion of the GDP (86.25%). Therefore a large part of the
regional variation in the UK economy occurs within England itself. London,
which is the capital of both the UK and England, has the largest regional
economy in England as well as the highest GDP per capita, whilst North East
England has both the smallest economy out of the regions as measured by total
nominal GDP, as well as the lowest GDP per capita in England.

Below is a list of the Regions of England by GDP and GDP per capita, also
provided by the ONS for the year 2022.

Rank | Region | Population | GDP (in millions of GBP) | GDP (in millions of USD) | Share of the UK total | GDP per capita (GBP) | GDP per capita (USD)   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1  | London | 8 866 180  | 562 179  | 693 096  | 22.43%  | 63 407  | 78 154   
2  | South East England | 9 379 833  | 374 453  | 461 665  | 14.94%  | 39 921  | 49 208   
3  | North West England | 7 516 113  | 247 199  | 304 755  | 9.86%  | 32 889  | 40 538   
4  | East of England | 6 398 497  | 213 828  | 263 556  | 8.53%  | 33 419  | 41 191   
5  | South West England | 5 764 881  | 194 030  | 239 186  | 7.74%  | 33 657  | 41 485   
6  | West Midlands | 6 021 653  | 181 354  | 223 599  | 7.23%  | 30 117  | 37 118   
7  | Yorkshire and the Humber | 5 541 262  | 170 304  | 209 933  | 6.79%  | 30 734  | 37 888   
8  | East Midlands | 4 934 939  | 146 482  | 180 663  | 5.84%  | 29 683  | 36 610   
9  | North East England | 2 683 040  | 71 763  | 88 526  | 2.86%  | 26 747  | 33 000   
England | 57 106 398  | 2 161 593  | 2 664 325  | 86.25%  | 37 852  | 46 655   
United Kingdom (total)  | 67 596 279  | 2 506 170  | 3 089 072  | 100%  | 37 076  | 45 758   
  
### Gross value added (2020)

Excluding the effects of North Sea oil and gas (which is classified in
official statistics as extra-regio), England has the highest gross value added
(GVA) and Wales the lowest of the UK's countries.

Rank  | Country  | GVA per head, 2020   
---|---|---  
1  | England | £32,866 ($42136)   
2  | Scotland | £29,629 ($37986)   
3  | Northern Ireland | £25,575 ($32788)   
4  | Wales | £23,882 ($30618)   
  
#### By English region

Within England, GVA per capita is highest in London. The following table shows
the GVA per capita of the nine statistical regions of England.

Rank  | Region  | GVA per head, 2020   
---|---|---  
1  | London | £55,974 ($71762)   
2  | South East England | £34,516 ($44251)   
3  | East of England | £29,176 ($37405)   
4  | North West England | £28,257 ($36227)   
5  | South West England | £28,012 ($35913)   
6  | West Midlands | £26,281 ($33694)   
7  | East Midlands | £25,956 ($33277)   
8  | Yorkshire and the Humber | £25,696 ($32944)   
9  | North East England | £23,109 ($29627)   
  
## Trade

Value of UK exports at constant prices, 1995–2016

The trade deficit (goods and services) narrowed £0.2 billion to £7.9 billion
in the three months to November 2018 as both goods and services exports each
increased £0.1 billion more than their respective imports.

Excluding erratic commodities (mainly aircraft) the total trade deficit
widened £1.2 billion to £9.5 billion in the three months to November 2018.

Large increases in export prices of oil and aircraft drove the narrowing of
the total trade deficit; removing the effect of inflation, the total trade
deficit widened £0.3 billion to £6.5 billion in the three months to November
2018.

The trade in goods deficit widened £0.8 billion with EU countries and narrowed
£0.9 billion with non-EU countries in the three months to November 2018, due
mainly to increases in imports from EU countries and exports to non-EU
countries.

The total trade deficit widened £4.1 billion in the 12 months to November 2018
due mainly to a £4.4 billion narrowing in the trade in services surplus.

After the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union, the
negotiation of a trade deal between the UK and the European Union including
her 27 member states might have the same status than third countries for
statistics related to imports and exports with the UK:

  * According to OEC World 2017 data, the EU-27-2020 could become/stay one of the notable partners of the UK, with exports from the UK reaching near $200B, close from the United States ($45B, and China $21B).
  * According to OEC World 2017 data, the EU-27-2020 could become/stay one of the notable partners of the UK, with imports to the UK reaching near $330B, close from the United States ($46B, and China $58B).

UK economy received £1 billion to boost through innovative trade
digitalisation act in July 2023.

**Trade deals being negotiated**

  * Canada–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement
  * India–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement
  * Gulf Cooperation Council–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement
  * United Kingdom–United States Free Trade Agreement
  * Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership
  * * Accession of the United Kingdom to CPTPP

**Other Trade Deals**

  * Free trade agreements of the United Kingdom

## Investment

In 2013 the UK was the leading country in Europe for inward foreign direct
investment (FDI) with $26.51bn. This gave it a 19.31% market share in Europe.
In contrast, the UK was second in Europe for outward FDI, with $42.59bn,
giving a 17.24% share of the European market.

In October 2017, the ONS revised the UK's balance of payments, changing the
net international investment position from a surplus of £469bn to a deficit of
£22bn. Deeper analysis of outward investment revealed that much of what was
thought to be foreign debt securities owned by British companies were actually
loans to British citizens. Inward investment also dropped, from a surplus of
£120bn in the first half of 2016 to a deficit of £25bn in the same period of
2017. The UK had been relying on a surplus of inward investment to make up for
its long-term current account deficit. In April 2021, Lord Grimstone
established the UK Investment Council to enhance UK inward investment and
inform the trade policy of the UK by providing a forum for global investors to
offer high-level advice to the government.

According to the Office for National Statistics, the UK is the biggest
investor in America, and the second biggest in China.

## Mergers and acquisitions

Since 1985 103,430 deals with UK participation have been announced. There have
been three major waves of increased M&A activity (2000, 2007 and 2017; see
graph "M&A in the UK"). 1999 however, was the year with the highest cumulated
value of deals (£490 bil, which is about 50% more than the current peak of
2017). The Finance industry and Energy & Power made up most of the value from
2000 until 2018 (both about 15%).

Here is a list of the top 10 deals including UK companies. The Vodafone –
Mannesmann deal is still the biggest deal in global history.

Rank  | Date  | Acquirer  | Acquirer nation  | Target  | Target nation  | Value  
(£ billions)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1  | 14 November 1999  | Vodafone AirTouch PLC  | United Kingdom  | Mannesmann AG  | Germany  | 126.95   
2  | 16 September 2015  | Anheuser-Busch Inbev SA/NV  | Belgium  | SABMiller PLC  | United Kingdom  | 77.24   
3  | 4 August 2015  | Royal Dutch Shell PLC  | Netherlands  | BG Group PLC  | United Kingdom  | 46.70   
4  | 17 January 2000  | Glaxo Wellcome PLC  | United Kingdom  | SmithKline Beecham PLC  | United Kingdom  | 46.48   
5  | 28 October 2004  | Royal Dutch Petroleum Co  | Netherlands  | Shell Transport & Trading Co  | United Kingdom  | 40.75   
6  | 21 October 2016  | British American Tobacco PLC  | United Kingdom  | Reynolds American Inc  | United States  | 40.10   
7  | 15 January 1999  | Vodafone Group PLC  | United Kingdom  | AirTouch Communications Inc  | United States  | 36.35   
8  | 30 May 2000  | France Telecom SA  | France  | Orange PLC  | United Kingdom  | 31.14   
9  | 8 November 1998  | British Petroleum Co PLC  | United Kingdom  | Amoco Corp  | United States  | 29.51   
10  | 31 October 2016  | GE Oil & Gas  | United Kingdom  | Baker Hughes Inc  | United States  | 26.63   
11  | 26 February 2009  | HM Treasury  | United Kingdom  | Royal Bank of Scotland Group  | United Kingdom  | 25.50   
  
  * In most cases both the acquiring and target companies have/had shareholders spread throughout the world, not only in the stated countries.

## European Union membership

The proportion of the country's exports going to the EU has fallen from 54 per
cent to 47 per cent over the past decade. The total value of exports however,
has increased in the same period from £130 billion (€160 billion) to £240
billion (€275 billion).

In June 2016 the UK voted to leave the EU in a national referendum on its
membership of the EU. After the activation of Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty,
the UK had been set to leave on Friday 29 March 2019. However the leave date
was extended to Friday 12 April 2019 and then extended again to Thursday 31
October 2019, and then extended again until Friday 31 January 2020 with the
ability to exit earlier. The future relationship between the UK and EU was
under negotiation until the end of October 2019. UK economic growth slowed
during 2019, with uncertainty over Brexit and a world economic slowdown
blamed.

The UK left the EU in January 2020. On 16 July 2020, the government of UK
affirmed that businesses across the United Kingdom, after the transition
period ends, will continue to enjoy internal trade and jobs would remain
protected against uncertain environment . From 1 January 2021, the powers
which were previously exercised at an EU level in at least 70 policy areas
were to directly transfer to the devolved administrations in Edinburgh,
Cardiff and Belfast for the first time.

## Poverty

The United Kingdom is a developed country with social welfare infrastructure,
thus discussions surrounding poverty tend to use a relatively high minimum
income compared to developing countries. Eurostat figures show that the
numbers of Britons at risk of poverty has fallen to 15.9% in 2014, down from
17.1% in 2010 and 19% in 2005 (after social transfers were taken into
account). Poverty is countered in United Kingdom with the welfare state.

The poverty line in the UK is commonly defined as being 60% of the median
household income. In 2007–2008, this was calculated to be £115 per week for
single adults with no dependent children; £199 per week for couples with no
dependent children; £195 per week for single adults with two dependent
children under 14; and £279 per week for couples with two dependent children
under 14. In 2007–2008, 13.5 million people, or 22% of the population, lived
below this line. This is a higher level of relative poverty than all but four
EU members. In the same year, 4.0 million children, 31% of the total, lived in
households below the poverty line, after housing costs were taken into
account. This is a decrease of 400,000 children since 1998–1999.

## Economic impacts of climate change

According to the Government, the number of households in flood risk will be up
to 970,000 homes in the 2020s, up from around 370,000 in January 2012. The
effects of flooding and managing flood risk cost the country about £2.2bn a
year, compared with the less than £1bn spent on flood protection and
management. UK agriculture is also being affected by drought and weather
changes.

In 2020 PricewaterhouseCoopers estimated that Storm Dennis damage to homes,
businesses and cars could be between £175m and £225m and Storm Ciara cost up
to £200m. Friends of the Earth criticised British government of the intended
cuts to flood defence spending. The protection against increasing flood risk
as a result of climate change requires rising investment. In 2009, the
Environment Agency calculated that the UK needs to be spending £20m more
compared to 2010 to 2011 as the baseline, each and every year out to 2035,
just to keep pace with climate change.

The British government and the economist Nicholas Stern published the Stern
Review on the Economics of Climate Change in 2006. The report states that
climate change is the greatest and widest-ranging market failure ever seen,
presenting a unique challenge for economics. The Review provides prescriptions
including environmental taxes to minimise economic and social disruptions. The
Stern Review's main conclusion is that the benefits of strong, early action on
climate change far outweigh the costs of not acting. The Review points to the
potential effects of climate change on water resources, food production,
health, and the environment. According to the Review, without action, the
overall costs of climate change will be equivalent to losing at least 5% of
global gross domestic product (GDP) each year, now and forever. Including a
wider range of risks and costs could increase this to 20% of GDP or more. The
review leads to a simple conclusion: the benefits of strong, early action
considerably outweigh the costs.

Climate change made the unusual rainfall in autumn and winter 2023-2024, 10
times more probable and 20% stronger. The rainfall led to "severe damage to
homes and infrastructure, power blackouts, travel cancellations, and heavy
losses of crops and livestock". The damage to arable crops alone is £1.2
billion, without counting vegetables. Claims for house insurance from weather
related disasters increased by more than a third.

## Data

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF
staff estimates in 2022–2027). Inflation below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP  
(in bn. US$PPP) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ PPP) | GDP  
(in bn. US$ nominal) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ nominal) | GDP growth  
(real) | In­flation rate  
(in %) | Unem­ploy­ment  
(in %) | Govern­ment debt  
(in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 511.8  | 9,085.1  | 603.6  | 10,715.4  | -2.1%  | 16.8%  | 7.1%  | 42.6%   
1981  | 556.3  | 9,870.7  | 587.3  | 10,420.4  | -0.7%  | 12.2%  | 9.7%  | 44.8%   
1982  | 602.3  | 10,699.9  | 558.3  | 9,918.9  | 2.0%  | 8.5%  | 10.7%  | 43.1%   
1983  | 652.2  | 11,580.6  | 532.1  | 9,448.7  | 4.2%  | 5.2%  | 11.5%  | 41.9%   
1984  | 690.9  | 12,247.2  | 504.2  | 8,938.7  | 2.2%  | 4.4%  | 11.8%  | 42.3%   
1985  | 742.1  | 13,121.9  | 536.6  | 9,488.1  | 4.1%  | 5.2%  | 11.4%  | 41.3%   
1986  | 780.9  | 13,776.7  | 654.7  | 11,549.7  | 3.1%  | 3.6%  | 11.3%  | 41.3%   
1987  | 843.4  | 14,847.8  | 813.1  | 14,315.0  | 5.4%  | 4.1%  | 10.4%  | 39.3%   
1988  | 922.1  | 16,200.4  | 990.2  | 17,398.2  | 5.4%  | 4.6%  | 8.6%  | 37.1%   
1989  | 981.6  | 17,198.6  | 1,008.4  | 17,667.9  | 2.4%  | 5.2%  | 7.2%  | 32.5%   
1990  | 1,024.8  | 17,904.8  | 1,195.4  | 20,884.2  | 0.6%  | 7.0%  | 7.1%  | 28.5%   
1991  | 1,046.9  | 18,226.8  | 1,250.3  | 21,767.1  | -1.4%  | 7.5%  | 8.9%  | 28.4%   
1992  | 1,074.1  | 18,653.1  | 1,292.1  | 22,438.0  | 0.2%  | 4.2%  | 10.0%  | 33.2%   
1993  | 1,126.0  | 19,509.9  | 1,157.5  | 20,055.8  | 2.3%  | 2.5%  | 10.4%  | 37.9%   
1994  | 1,193.4  | 20,624.6  | 1,244.0  | 21,499.6  | 3.4%  | 2.0%  | 9.5%  | 40.6%   
1995  | 1,248.2  | 21,511.1  | 1,346.7  | 23,208.7  | 2.4%  | 2.6%  | 8.6%  | 43.6%   
1996  | 1,301.9  | 22,383.3  | 1,423.0  | 24,464.8  | 2.6%  | 2.4%  | 8.1%  | 43.7%   
1997  | 1,389.4  | 23,825.5  | 1,559.9  | 26,749.9  | 4.9%  | 1.8%  | 7.0%  | 43.2%   
1998  | 1,449.3  | 24,785.2  | 1,653.5  | 28,277.9  | 3.4%  | 1.6%  | 6.3%  | 40.9%   
1999  | 1,513.7  | 25,793.8  | 1,686.2  | 28,733.2  | 3.1%  | 1.3%  | 6.0%  | 39.3%   
2000  | 1,604.8  | 27,253.1  | 1,665.3  | 28,279.7  | 4.3%  | 0.8%  | 5.5%  | 36.6%   
2001  | 1,675.0  | 28,335.4  | 1,644.3  | 27,816.7  | 2.6%  | 1.2%  | 5.1%  | 33.9%   
2002  | 1,737.2  | 29,262.8  | 1,786.9  | 30,099.6  | 1.8%  | 1.3%  | 5.2%  | 34.1%   
2003  | 1,825.2  | 30,604.8  | 2,059.0  | 34,525.0  | 3.1%  | 1.4%  | 5.0%  | 35.3%   
2004  | 1,918.3  | 31,998.7  | 2,422.9  | 40,415.5  | 2.4%  | 1.3%  | 4.8%  | 38.2%   
2005  | 2,029.8  | 33,598.5  | 2,547.7  | 42,171.2  | 2.7%  | 2.1%  | 4.8%  | 39.4%   
2006  | 2,146.5  | 35,288.4  | 2,720.9  | 44,731.6  | 2.4%  | 2.3%  | 5.4%  | 40.4%   
2007  | 2,254.5  | 36,767.2  | 3,107.4  | 50,675.5  | 2.6%  | 2.3%  | 5.4%  | 41.4%   
2008  | 2,292.3  | 37,077.1  | 2,970.0  | 48,039.0  | -0.2%  | 3.6%  | 5.7%  | 49.0%   
2009  | 2,209.0  | 35,479.0  | 2,434.5  | 39,101.2  | -4.6%  | 2.2%  | 7.6%  | 62.8%   
2010  | 2,283.2  | 36,379.2  | 2,493.6  | 39,731.6  | 2.2%  | 3.3%  | 7.9%  | 74.0%   
2011  | 2,364.6  | 37,363.8  | 2,675.8  | 42,281.9  | 1.1%  | 4.5%  | 8.1%  | 79.5%   
2012  | 2,453.4  | 38,511.1  | 2,719.6  | 42,691.2  | 1.5%  | 2.8%  | 8.0%  | 82.7%   
2013  | 2,579.2  | 40,232.7  | 2,805.1  | 43,757.4  | 1.8%  | 2.6%  | 7.6%  | 83.6%   
2014  | 2,686.2  | 41,584.0  | 3,088.8  | 47,816.0  | 3.2%  | 1.5%  | 6.2%  | 85.5%   
2015  | 2,795.1  | 42,928.5  | 2,957.2  | 45,418.9  | 2.2%  | 0.0%  | 5.4%  | 86.0%   
2016  | 2,928.3  | 44,606.1  | 2,733.0  | 41,630.5  | 1.9%  | 0.7%  | 4.9%  | 85.8%   
2017  | 3,074.4  | 46,553.5  | 2,701.3  | 40,903.5  | 2.7%  | 2.7%  | 4.4%  | 85.1%   
2018  | 3,199.8  | 48,163.7  | 2,904.5  | 43,719.0  | 1.4%  | 2.5%  | 4.1%  | 84.5%   
2019  | 3,311.5  | 49,575.6  | 2,880.4  | 43,121.1  | 1.6%  | 1.8%  | 3.8%  | 83.9%   
2020  | 3,040.7  | 45,329.1  | 2,758.9  | 41,127.4  | -10.4%  | 0.9%  | 4.6%  | 102.6%   
2021  | 3,402.7  | 50,522.7  | 3,187.6  | 47,328.8  | 8.7%  | 2.6%  | 4.5%  | 95.3%   
2022  | 3,776.0  | 55,862.1  | 3,198.5  | 47,317.6  | 4.3%  | 9.1%  | 3.8%  | 87.0%   
2023  | 3,922.9  | 57,821.9  | 3,479.5  | 51,286.1  | 0.1%  | 9.0%  | 4.8%  | 79.9%   
2024  | 4,027.7  | 59,160.0  | 3,757.4  | 55,189.5  | 0.6%  | 3.7%  | 5.0%  | 76.7%   
2025  | 4,198.8  | 61,471.6  | 3,969.9  | 58,120.1  | 2.3%  | 1.8%  | 4.3%  | 73.7%   
2026  | 4,373.1  | 63,829.0  | 4,217.7  | 61,562.0  | 2.2%  | 2.0%  | 4.2%  | 70.6%   
2027  | 4,524.5  | 65,857.4  | 4,449.8  | 64,768.9  | 1.5%  | 2.0%  | 4.2%  | 68.0%