Economy of Greece  
---  
Overview  
  
  *   * Agriculture
  * Banking
  * (Bank of Greece, National Bank of Greece, list)
  * Communications
  * Companies
  * Energy
  * Industry
  * Ports
  * Shipping
  * Stock Exchange
  * (companies listed)
  * Tourism
  * Transport

  
History  
  
  * Economic history of Greece and the Greek world
  * Greek economic miracle
  * Greek debt crisis

  
Related  
  
  * Brands
  * Greece and the International Monetary Fund
  * International rankings
  * Thessaloniki International Fair

  
  
  * Greece portal

  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The economy of Greece is an advanced, high-income economy. It is the 50th-
largest in the world, with an annual nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of
$267.348 billion. In terms of purchasing power parity, Greece is the world's
54th-largest economy, at $467.590 billion in annual output. It is the 16th-
largest economy in the European Union and eleventh largest in the eurozone.
According to the International Monetary Fund's figures for 2025, Greece's GDP
per capita is $25,756 at nominal value and $45,048 at purchasing power parity.
Greece is a welfare state and ranks relatively highly among OECD nations in
terms of social spending, which stood at 23.7% of GDP in 2024.

It is a developed country, with an economy based on the service (80%) and
industrial sectors (16%), and the agricultural sector contributing an
estimated 4% of national economic output in 2017. Important Greek industries
include tourism and shipping. With 31.3 million international tourists in
2019, Greece was the 7th-most-visited country in the European Union and 13th
in the world, marking a steady increase from 18 million tourists in 2013. The
Greek Merchant Navy is the largest in the world, with Greek-owned vessels
accounting for 21% of global deadweight tonnage as of 2021; the total capacity
of the Greek-owned fleet has increased by 45.8% compared to 2014. The
increased demand for international maritime transportation between Greece and
Asia has resulted in unprecedented investment in the shipping industry.

The country is a significant agricultural producer within the EU. Greece has
the largest economy in Southeast Europe and is an important regional investor.
Greece was the largest foreign investor in Albania in 2013, the third in
Bulgaria, in the top-three in Romania and Serbia and the most important
trading partner and largest foreign investor in North Macedonia. The Greek
telecommunications company OTE has made significant public investment across
Southeast Europe.

Greece was a founding member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) and of the Organization of the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation (BSEC). The country joined what is now the European Union in 1981.
In 2001 Greece adopted the euro as its currency, replacing the Greek drachma
at an exchange rate of 340.75 drachmae per euro. Greece is a member of the
International Monetary Fund and of the World Trade Organization, and ranked
34th on Ernst & Young's Globalization Index 2011\.

World War II (1939–1945) devastated the country's economy, but the high levels
of economic growth that followed from 1950 to 1980 have been called the Greek
economic miracle. From 2000 Greece saw high levels of GDP growth above the
Eurozone average, peaking at 5.8% in 2003, 5.4% in 2004 and 6.4% in 2006. The
subsequent Great Recession and Greek government-debt crisis, a central focus
of the wider euro area crisis, plunged the economy into a sharp downturn, with
real GDP growth rates of −4.1% in 2009, −5.7% in 2010, −9.9% in 2011, −8.3% in
2012 and −2.3% in 2013. In 2011, the country's government debt reached €356
billion (172% of nominal GDP). After negotiating the biggest debt
restructuring in history with the private sector, which sustained losses in
the order of €100 billion for private bond investors, Greece reduced its
sovereign debt burden to €280 billion (137% of GDP) in the first quarter of
2012. Greece achieved a real GDP growth rate of 0.8% in 2014—after five
consecutive years of economic decline—but the economy contracted by 0.2% in
2015 and recorded zero growth in 2016. The country returned to modest growth
rates of 1.5% in 2017, 2.1% in 2018 and 2.3% in 2019. GDP contracted by 9.2%
in 2020 during the global recession caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. However,
the economy rebounded by 8.7% in 2021, 5.7% in 2022, 2.3% in 2023 and 2.3% in
2024. On 20 August 2022, Greece formally exited the EU's "enhanced
surveillance framework", which had been in place since the conclusion of the
third bailout programme exactly four years earlier. On 2 December 2022,
Berlin-based credit rating agency Scope assigned a positive outlook to
Greece's BB+ rating, presaging the country's return to investment grade. On 31
July 2023, Greece's investment-grade status was restored by Japanese credit
rating agency R&I. Scope, DBRS, S&P and Fitch followed suit on 4 August, 8
September, 20 October and 1 December 2023 respectively, but Moody's delayed
doing so until 14 March 2025. _The Economist_ ranked Greece the world's top
economic performer for 2022 and 2023, citing significant improvements in five
key economic and financial indicators. Tourism reached an all-time record in
2023, with approximately 32 million tourists making Greece one of the most
visited countries in the world.

## History

| This section **appears to beslanted towards recent events.** Please try to
keep recent events in historical perspective and add more content related to
non-recent events. _( October 2011)_  
---|---  
Export of raisin from the port of Patras, late 19th century Historical GDP per
capita development

The evolution of the Greek economy during the 19th century (a period that
transformed a large part of the world because of the Industrial Revolution)
has been little researched. Recent research from 2006 examines the gradual
development of industry and further development of shipping in a predominantly
agricultural economy, calculating an average rate of per capita GDP growth
between 1833 and 1911 that was only slightly lower than that of the other
Western European nations. Industrial activity, (including heavy industry like
shipbuilding) was evident, mainly in Ermoupolis and Piraeus. Nonetheless,
Greece faced economic hardships and defaulted on its external loans in 1843,
1860 and 1893.

Other studies support the above view on the general trends in the economy,
providing comparative measures of standard of living. The per capita income
(in purchasing power terms) of Greece was 65% that of France in 1850, 56% in
1890, 62% in 1938, 75% in 1980, 90% in 2007, 96.4% in 2008 and 97.9% in 2009.

The country's post-World War II development has largely been connected with
the Greek economic miracle. During that period, Greece saw growth rates second
only to those of Japan, while ranking first in Europe in terms of GDP growth.
It is indicative that between 1960 and 1973 the Greek economy grew by an
average of 7.7%, in contrast to 4.7% for the EU15 and 4.9% for the OECD. Also
during that period, exports grew by an average annual rate of 12.6%.

### Strengths and weaknesses

Greece enjoys a high standard of living and very high Human Development Index,
being ranked 32nd in the world in 2019. However, the severe recession of
recent years saw GDP per capita fall from 94% of the EU average in 2009 to 67%
between 2017 and 2019. During the same period, Actual Individual Consumption
(AIC) per capita fell from 104% to 78% of the EU average.

Greece's main industries are tourism, shipping, industrial products, food and
tobacco processing, textiles, chemicals, metal products, mining and petroleum.
Greece's GDP growth has also, as an average, since the early 1990s been higher
than the EU average. However, the Greek economy continues to face significant
problems, including high unemployment levels, inefficient public sector
bureaucracy, tax evasion, corruption and low global competitiveness.

Greece is ranked 59th in the world, and 21st among EU member states, on the
Corruption Perceptions Index. Thus, it has roughly returned to its ranking
prior to the 2010–2018 debt crisis. However, Greece still has the EU's lowest
Index of Economic Freedom and second lowest Global Competitiveness Index,
ranking 113th and 59th in the world respectively.

GDP growth rates of the Greek economy between 1961 and 2010

After fourteen consecutive years of economic growth, Greece went into
recession in 2008. By the end of 2009, the Greek economy faced the highest
budget deficit and government debt-to-GDP ratio in the EU. After several
upward revisions, the 2009 budget deficit is now estimated at 15.7% of GDP.
This, combined with rapidly rising debt levels (127.9% of GDP in 2009) led to
a precipitous increase in borrowing costs, effectively shutting Greece out of
the global financial markets and resulting in a severe economic crisis.

Greece was accused of trying to cover up the extent of its massive budget
deficit during the 2008 financial crisis. The allegation was prompted by the
massive revision of the 2009 budget deficit forecast by the new PASOK
government elected in October 2009, from "6–8%" (estimated by the previous New
Democracy government) to 12.7% (later revised to 15.7%). However, the accuracy
of the revised figures has also been questioned, and in February 2012 the
Hellenic Parliament voted in favor of an official investigation following
accusations by a former member of the Hellenic Statistical Authority that the
deficit had been artificially inflated in order to justify harsher austerity
measures.

Average GDP growth by era  1961–1970  | 8.44%   
---|---  
1971–1980  | 4.70%   
1981–1990  | 0.70%   
1991–2000  | 2.36%   
2001–2007  | 4.11%   
2008–2011  | −4.8%   
2012–2015  | −2.52%   
2016-2019  | 1.05%   
2020-2022  | 1.78%   
  
The Greek labor force, which amount around 5 million workers, average 2,032
hours of work per worker annually in 2011, is ranked fourth among OECD
countries, after Mexico, South Korea and Chile. The Groningen Growth &
Development Centre has published a poll revealing that between 1995 and 2005,
Greece was the country whose workers have the most hours/year work among
European nations; Greeks worked an average of 1,900 hours per year, followed
by Spaniards (average of 1,800 hours/year).

As a result of the ongoing economic crisis, industrial production in the
country went down by 8% between March 2010 and March 2011, The volume of
building activity saw a reduction of 73% in 2010. Additionally, the turnover
in retail sales saw a decline of 9% between February 2010 and February 2011.

Between 2008 and 2013 unemployment skyrocketed, from a generational low of
7.2% in the second and third quarters of 2008 to a high of 27.9% in June 2013,
leaving over a million jobless. Youth unemployment peaked at 64.9% in May
2013. Unemployment figures have steadily improved in recent years, with the
overall rate falling to 8.3% in April 2025 and youth unemployment dropping to
16.1% in September 2024.

### Eurozone entry

Average Public Debt-to-GDP  
(1909–2008)  Country  | Average Public  
Debt-to-GDP (% of GDP)  
---|---  
United Kingdom  | 104.7   
Belgium  | 86.0   
Italy  | 76.0   
Canada  | 71.0   
France  | 62.6   
Greece  | 60.2   
United States  | 47.1   
Germany  | 32.1   
Greece entered the Eurozone in 2001

Greece was accepted into the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union
by the European Council on 19 June 2000, based on a number of criteria
(inflation rate, budget deficit, public debt, long-term interest rates,
exchange rate) using 1999 as the reference year. After an audit commissioned
by the incoming New Democracy government in 2004, Eurostat revealed that the
statistics for the budget deficit had been under-reported. However, even after
all corrections that followed, the reference year budget deficit did not
exceed the allowable upper limit (3%) according to the Eurostat accounting
method in force at the time of application, and thus Greece had still met all
critiera for Eurozone entry (details given below).

Most of the differences in the revised budget deficit numbers were due to a
temporary change of accounting practices by the new government, i.e.,
recording expenses when military material was ordered rather than received.
However, it was the retroactive application of ESA95 methodology (applied
since 2000) by Eurostat, that finally raised the reference year (1999) budget
deficit to 3.38% of GDP, thus exceeding the 3% limit. This led to claims that
Greece (similar claims have been made about other European countries like
Italy) had not actually met all five accession criteria, and the common
perception that Greece entered the Eurozone through "falsified" deficit
numbers.

In the 2005 OECD report for Greece, it was clearly stated that "the impact of
new accounting rules on the fiscal figures for the years 1997 to 1999 ranged
from 0.7 to 1 percentage point of GDP; this retroactive change of methodology
was responsible for the revised deficit exceeding 3% in 1999, the year of
[Greece's] EMU membership qualification". The above led the Greek minister of
finance to clarify that the 1999 budget deficit was below the prescribed 3%
limit when calculated with the ESA79 methodology in force at the time of
Greece's application, and thus the criteria had been met.

The original accounting practice for military expenses was later restored in
line with Eurostat recommendations, theoretically lowering even the
ESA95-calculated 1999 Greek budget deficit to below 3% (an official Eurostat
calculation is still pending for 1999).

An error sometimes made is the confusion of discussion regarding Greece's
Eurozone entry with the controversy regarding usage of derivatives' deals with
U.S. Banks by Greece and other Eurozone countries to artificially reduce their
reported budget deficits. A currency swap arranged with Goldman Sachs allowed
Greece to "hide" 2.8 billion Euros of debt, however, this affected deficit
values after 2001 (when Greece had already been admitted into the Eurozone)
and is not related to Greece's Eurozone entry.

A study of the period 1999–2009 by forensic accountants has found that data
submitted to Eurostat by Greece, among other countries, had a statistical
distribution indicative of manipulation; "Greece with a mean value of 17.74,
shows the largest deviation from Benford's law among the members of the
eurozone, followed by Belgium with a value of 17.21 and Austria with a value
of 15.25".

### 2010–2018 government debt crisis

Greece's debt percentage since 1977, compared to the average of the Eurozone

#### Historical Debt

Greece, like other European nations, had faced debt crises in the 19th
century, as well as a similar crisis in 1932 during the Great Depression. In
general, however, during the 20th century it enjoyed one of the highest GDP
growth rates on the planet (for a quarter century from the early 1950s to mid
1970s, second in the world after Japan). Average Greek government debt-to-GDP
for the entire century before the crisis (1909–2008) was lower than that for
the UK, Canada, or France, while for the 30-year period (1952–1981) until
entrance into the European Economic Community, the Greek government debt-to-
GDP ratio averaged only 19.8%.

Between 1981 and 1993 Greece's government debt-to-GDP ratio steadily rose,
surpassing the average of what is today the Eurozone in the mid-1980s (see
chart right). For the next 15 years, from 1993 to 2007 (i.e., before the 2008
financial crisis), Greece's government debt-to-GDP ratio remained roughly
unchanged (the value was not affected by the 2004 Athens Olympics), averaging
102% - a value lower than that for Italy (107%) and Belgium (110%) during the
same 15-year period, and comparable to that for the U.S. or the OECD average
in 2017.

During the latter period, the country's annual budget deficit usually exceeded
3% of GDP, but its effect on the debt-to-GDP ratio was counterbalanced by high
GDP growth rates. The debt-to-GDP values for 2006 and 2007 (about 105%) were
established after audits resulted in corrections according to Eurostat
methodology, of up to 10 percentage points for the particular years (as well
as similar corrections for the years 2008 and 2009). These corrections,
although altering the debt level by a maximum of about 10%, resulted in a
popular notion that "Greece was previously hiding its debt".

#### Evolution of the debt crisis

The Greek crisis was triggered by the turmoil of the Great Recession, which
led the budget deficits of several Western nations to reach or exceed 10% of
GDP. In Greece's case, the high budget deficit (which, after several
corrections, was revealed that it had been allowed to reach 10.2% and 15.1% of
GDP in 2008 and 2009, respectively) was coupled with a high public debt to GDP
ratio (which, until then, was relatively stable for several years, at just
above 100% of GDP - as calculated after all corrections). Thus, the country
appeared to lose control of its public debt to GDP ratio, which already
reached 127% of GDP in 2009. In addition, being a member of the Eurozone, the
country had essentially no autonomous monetary policy flexibility. Finally,
there was an effect of controversies about Greek statistics (due the
aforementioned drastic budget deficit revisions which lead to an increase in
the calculated value of the Greek public debt by about 10%, i.e., a public
debt to GDP of about 100% until 2007), while there have been arguments about a
possible effect of media reports. Consequently, Greece was "punished" by the
markets which increased borrowing rates, making impossible for the country to
finance its debt since early 2010, exacerbating the euro area crisis.

The Greek economy faced its most-severe crisis since the restoration of
democracy in 1974 as the Greek government revised its deficit forecasts from
3.7% in early 2009 and 6% in September 2009, to 12.7% of gross domestic
product (GDP) in October 2009.

The aforementioned budget deficit and debt revisions were connected with
findings that, through the assistance of Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and
numerous other banks, financial products were developed which enabled the
governments of Greece, Italy and many other European countries to hide parts
of their borrowing. Dozens of similar agreements were concluded across Europe
whereby banks supplied cash in advance in exchange for future payments by the
governments involved; in turn, the liabilities of the involved countries were
"kept off the books".

According to _Der Spiegel_ , credits given to European governments were
disguised as "swaps" and consequently did not get registered as debt because
Eurostat at the time ignored statistics involving financial derivatives. A
German derivatives dealer had commented to _Der Spiegel_ that "The Maastricht
rules can be circumvented quite legally through swaps," and "In previous
years, Italy used a similar trick to mask its true debt with the help of a
different US bank." These conditions had enabled Greek as well as many other
European governments to spend beyond their means, while meeting the deficit
targets of the European Union and the monetary union guidelines. In May 2010,
the Greek government deficit was again revised and estimated to be 13.6% which
was among the highest relative to GDP, with Iceland in first place at 15.7%
and the United Kingdom third with 12.6%.[_dubious – discuss_] Public debt was
forecast, according to some estimates, to hit 120% of GDP during 2010.

Greek bonds

20 year

15 year

10 year

5 year

1 year

3 month

1 month

As a consequence, there was a crisis in international confidence in Greece's
ability to repay its sovereign debt, as reflected by the rise of the country's
borrowing rates (although their slow rise – the 10-year government bond yield
only exceeded 7% in April 2010 – coinciding with a large number of negative
articles, has led to arguments about the role of international news media in
the evolution of the crisis). In order to avert a default (as high borrowing
rates effectively prohibited access to the markets), in May 2010 the other
Eurozone countries, and the IMF, agreed to a "rescue package" which involved
giving Greece an immediate €45 billion in bail-out loans, with more funds to
follow, totaling €110 billion. In order to secure the funding, Greece was
required to adopt harsh austerity measures to bring its deficit under control.
Their implementation was to be monitored and evaluated by the European
Commission, the European Central Bank and the IMF.

The 2008 financial crisis – particularly the austerity package put forth by
the EU and the IMF – has been met with anger by the Greek public, leading to
riots and social unrest, while there have been theories about the effect of
international media. Despite - others say because of - the long range of
austerity measures, the government deficit has not been reduced accordingly,
mainly, according to many economists, because of the subsequent recession.

Public sector workers have come out on strike in order to resist job cuts and
reductions to salaries as the government promises that a large scale
privatisation programme will be accelerated. Immigrants are sometimes treated
as scapegoats for economic problems by far-right extremists.

In 2013, Greece became the first developed market to be reclassified as an
emerging market by different financial rating companies.

By July 2014 there were still anger and protests about the austerity measures,
with a 24-hour strike among government workers timed to coincide with an audit
by inspectors from the International Monetary Fund, the European Union and
European Central Bank in advance of a decision on a second bailout of one
billion euros ($1.36 billion), due in late July.

Greece exited its six-year recession in the second quarter of 2014, but the
challenges of securing political stability and debt sustainability remained.

A third bailout was agreed in July 2015, after a confrontation with the newly
elected leftist government of Alexis Tsipras. In June 2017, news reports
indicated that the "crushing debt burden" had not been alleviated and that
Greece was at the risk of defaulting on some payments. The International
Monetary Fund stated that the country should be able to borrow again "in due
course". At the time, the Euro zone gave Greece another credit of
$9.5-billion, $8.5 billion of loans and brief details of a possible debt
relief with the assistance of the IMF. On 13 July, the Greek government sent a
letter of intent to the IMF with 21 commitments it promised to meet by June
2018. They included changes in labour laws, a plan to cap public sector work
contracts, to transform temporary contracts into permanent agreements and to
recalculate pension payments to reduce spending on social security.

Greece's bailouts successfully ended (as declared) on 20 August 2018.

#### Effects of the bailout programmes on the debt crisis

There was a 25% drop in Greece's GDP, connected with the bailout programmes.
This had a critical effect: the Debt-to-GDP ratio, the key factor defining the
severity of the crisis, would jump from its 2009 level of 127% to about 170%,
solely due to the GDP drop (i.e., for the same Debt). Such a level is
considered unsustainable. Reports show that, for government debt, the
threshold for unhealthy Debt-to-GDPT ratio is around 85%. In a 2013 report,
the IMF admitted that it had underestimated the effects of so extensive tax
hikes and budget cuts on the country's GDP and issued an informal apology.

### COVID-19 recession

The COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted all sectors of the Greek economy,
and tourism in particular. As a result, GDP shrank by 9.2% in 2020, but
rebounded by 8.7% in 2021, 5.7% in 2022, 2.3% in 2023 and 2.3% in 2024. In
June 2021, the European Commission agreed to disburse approximately 30 billion
Euros in COVID-19 related economic aid (12 billion in loans and 18 billion in
grants).

### Current Greek economy

In 2024, the Greek economy is forecast to grow nearly 3%, meaning it
approaches its pre-crisis size of 2009 and far outpacing the euro zone average
economic growth of 0.8%.

## Primary sector

### Agriculture and fishery

  * A vineyard in Naoussa, central Macedonia

  * Sacks with Fava Santorinis

  * Olive oil production

In 2010, Greece was the European Union's largest producer of cotton (183,800
tons) and pistachios (8,000 tons) and ranked second in the production of rice
(229,500 tons) and olives (147,500 tons), third in the production of figs
(11,000 tons) and almonds (44,000 tons), tomatoes (1,400,000 tons) and
watermelons (578,400 tons) and fourth in the production of tobacco (22,000
tons). Agriculture contributes 3.8% of the country's GDP and employs 12.4% of
the country's labor force.

Greece is a major beneficiary of the Common Agricultural Policy of the
European Union. As a result of the country's entry to the European Community,
much of its agricultural infrastructure has been upgraded and agricultural
output increased. Between 2000 and 2007 organic farming in Greece increased by
885%, the highest change percentage in the EU.

In 2007, Greece accounted for 19% of the EU's fishing haul in the
Mediterranean Sea, ranked third with 85,493 tons, and ranked first in the
number of fishing vessels in the Mediterranean between European Union members.
Additionally, the country ranked 11th in the EU in total quantity of fish
caught, with 87,461 tons.

In September 2023, the main agricultural production was severely affected by a
deadly flood in the Thessaly region, with estimated losses of 3.7 billion.

## Secondary sector

### Industry

Karelia Tobacco Company factory in Kalamata

Between 2005 and 2011, Greece has had the highest percentage increase in
industrial output compared to 2005 levels out of all European Union members,
with an increase of 6%. Eurostat statistics show that the industrial sector
was hit by the Greek government-debt crisis throughout 2009 and 2010, with
domestic output decreasing by 5.8% and industrial production in general by
13.4%. Currently, Greece is ranked third in the European Union in the
production of marble (over 920,000 tons), after Italy and Spain.

Between 1999 and 2008, the volume of retail trade in Greece increased by an
average of 4.4% per year (a total increase of 44%), while it decreased by
11.3% in 2009. The only sector that did not see negative growth in 2009 was
administration and services, with a marginal growth of 2.0%.

In 2009, Greece's labor productivity was 98% that of the EU average, but its
productivity-per-hour-worked was 74% that the Eurozone average. The largest
industrial employer in the country (in 2007) was the manufacturing industry
(407,000 people), followed by the construction industry (305,000) and mining
(14,000).

Greece has a significant shipbuilding and ship maintenance industry. The six
shipyards around the port of Piraeus are among the largest in Europe. In
recent years, Greece has become a leader in the construction and maintenance
of luxury yachts.

  * HSY-55-class gunboat _Polemistis_ , built by Hellenic Shipyards Co. for the Hellenic Navy

  * The fuselage for the Dassault nEUROn stealth jet is produced in Greece by the Hellenic Aerospace Industry

### Mining

  * Aluminium of Greece facilities

  * Gold mine in Thasos

  * Gerakini mine

  * Skouries mine

  * Marble quarry in Sifnos

  * Calcium carbonate loaded at the port of Argostoli

## Tertiary sector

### Maritime industry

The Port of Thessaloniki Neorion shipyard, located in Ermoupolis 23.2% of the
world's total merchant fleet is owned by Greek companies[_citation needed_],
making it the largest in the world. They are ranked in the top 5 for all kinds
of ships, including first for tankers and bulk carriers.

Shipping has traditionally been a key sector in the Greek economy since
ancient times. In 1813, the Greek merchant navy was made up of 615 ships. Its
total tonnage was 153,580 tons and was manned with 37,526 crewmembers and
5,878 cannons. In 1914 the figures stood at 449,430 tons and 1,322 ships (of
which 287 were steam boats).

During the 1960s, the size of the Greek fleet nearly doubled, primarily
through the investment undertaken by the shipping magnates Onassis,
Vardinoyannis, Livanos and Niarchos. The basis of the modern Greek maritime
industry was formed after World War II when Greek shipping businessmen were
able to amass surplus ships sold to them by the United States Government
through the Ship Sales Act of the 1940s.

Greece has the largest merchant navy in the world, accounting for more than
15% of the world's total deadweight tonnage (dwt) according to the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development. The Greek merchant navy's total
dwt of nearly 245 million is comparable only to Japan's, which is ranked
second with almost 224 million. Additionally, Greece represents 39.52% of all
of the European Union's dwt. However, today's fleet roster is smaller than an
all-time high of 5,000 ships in the late 1970s.

Greece is ranked third in the world by number of ships, with 4,709, behind
Japan, with 5,974, and China, which leads with 7,114 owned vessels. A European
Community Shipowners' Associations report for 2011–2012 reveals that the Greek
flag is the seventh-most-used internationally for shipping, while it ranks
second in the EU.

In terms of ship categories, Greek companies have 22.6% of the world's tankers
and 16.1% of the world's bulk carriers (in dwt). An additional equivalent of
27.45% of the world's tanker dwt is on order, with another 12.7% of bulk
carriers also on order. Shipping accounts for an estimated 6% of Greek GDP,
employs about 160,000 people (4% of the workforce), and represents 1/3 of the
country's trade deficit. Earnings from shipping amounted to €14.1 billion in
2011, while between 2000 and 2010 Greek shipping contributed a total of €140
billion (half of the country's public debt in 2009 and 3.5 times the receipts
from the European Union in the period 2000–2013). The 2011 ECSA report showed
that there are approximately 750 Greek shipping companies in operation.

The latest available data from the Union of Greek Shipowners show that "the
Greek-owned ocean-going fleet consists of 3,428 ships, totaling 245 million
deadweight tonnes in capacity. This equals 15.6 percent of the carrying
capacity of the entire global fleet, including 23.6 percent of the world
tanker fleet and 17.2 percent of dry bulk".

Counting shipping as quasi-exports and in terms of monetary value, Greece
ranked 4th globally in 2011 having exported shipping services worth 17,704.132
million $; only Denmark, Germany and South Korea ranked higher during that
year. Similarly counting shipping services provided to Greece by other
countries as quasi-imports and the difference between exports and imports as a
trade balance, Greece in 2011 ranked in the latter second behind Germany,
having imported shipping services worth 7,076.605 million US$ and having run a
trade surplus of 10,712.342 million US$. In 2022, Greek used vessel sales were
second only to China's.

**Greece, shipping services** Year | 2000 | 2001 | 2002 | 2003 | 2004 | 2005 | 2006–2008 | 2009 | 2010 | 2011   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Exports:  |   
Global ranking  | 5th | 5th | 5th | 4th | 3rd | 5th | -b | 5th | 6th | 4th   
Value (US$ million)  | 7,558.995 | 7,560.559 | 7,527.175 | 10,114.736 | 15,402.209 | 16,127.623 | -b | 17,033.714 | 18,559.292 | 17,704.132   
Value (€ million)  | 8,172.559 | 8,432.670 | 7,957.654 | 8,934.660 | 12,382.636 | 12,949.869 | -b | 12,213.786 | 13,976.558 | 12,710.859   
Value (%GDP)  | 5.93 | 5.76 | 5.08 | 5.18 | 6.68 | 6.71 | n/a | 5.29 | 6.29 | 6.10   
Imports:  |   
Global ranking  | 14th | 13th | 14th | -b | 14th | 16th | -b | 12th | 13th | 9th   
Value (US$ million)  | 3,314.718 | 3,873.791 | 3,757.000 | -b | 5,570.145 | 5,787.234 | -b | 6,653.395 | 7,846.950 | 7,076.605   
Value (€ million)  | 3,583.774 | 4,320.633 | 3,971.863 | -b | 4,478.129 | 4,646.929 | -b | 4,770.724 | 5,909.350 | 5,080.720   
Value (%GDP)  | 2.60 | 2.95 | 2.54 | n/a | 2.42 | 2.41 | n/a | 2.06 | 2.66 | 2.44   
Trade balance:  |   
Global ranking  | 1st | 2nd | 1st | 1ste | 1st | 1st | -b | 2nd | 1st | 2nd   
Value (US$ million)  | 4,244.277 | 3,686.768 | 3,770.175 | 10,114.736e | 9,832.064 | 10,340.389 | -b | 10,340.389 | 10,380.319  | 10,712.342   
Value (€ million)  | 4,588.785 | 4,112.037 | 3,985.791 | 8,934.660e | 7,904.508 | 8,302.940 | -b | 7,443.063 | 8,067.208 | 7,630.140   
Value (%GDP)  | 3.33 | 2.81 | 2.54 | 5.18e | 4.27 | 4.30 | n/a | 3.22 | 3.63 | 3.66   
GDP (€ million)  | 137,930.1 | 146,427.6 | 156,614.3 | 172,431.8 | 185,265.7 | 193,049.7b | n/a | 231,081.2p | 222,151.5p | 208,531.7p  
| **b** source reports break in time series; **p** source characterises data
as provisional; **e** reported data may be erroneous because of relevant break
in "Imports" time series  
  
### Telecommunications

OTE headquarters in Athens

Between 1949 and the 1980s, telephone communications in Greece were a state
monopoly by the Hellenic Telecommunications Organization, better known by its
acronym, OTE. Despite the liberalization of telephone communications in the
country in the 1980s, OTE still dominates the Greek market in its field and
has emerged as one of the largest telecommunications companies in Southeast
Europe. Since 2011, the company's major shareholder is Deutsche Telekom with a
40% stake, while the Greek state continues to own 10% of the company's shares.
OTE owns several subsidiaries across in Southeast Europe, including Cosmote,
Greece's top mobile telecommunications provider, Cosmote Romania and Albanian
Mobile Communications.

Other mobile telecommunications companies active in Greece are Wind Hellas and
Vodafone Greece. The total number of active cellular phone accounts in the
country in 2009 based on statistics from the country's mobile phone providers
was over 20 million, a penetration of 180%. Additionally, there are 5.745
million active landlines in the country.

Greece has tended to lag behind its European Union partners in terms of
Internet use, with the gap closing rapidly in recent years. The percentage of
households with Internet access more than doubled between 2006 and 2013, from
23% to 56% respectively (compared with an EU average of 49% and 79%). At the
same time, there was a massive increase in the proportion of households with a
broadband connection, from 4% in 2006 to 55% in 2013 (compared with an EU
average of 30% and 76%). By 2023, the percentage of Greek households with
Internet access had reached 86.9%.

### Tourism

Porto Carras resort, Chalkidiki The island of Santorini, popular tourist
destination.

Tourism in the modern sense only started to flourish in Greece in the years
post-1950, although tourism in ancient times is also documented in relation to
religious or sports festivals such as the Olympic Games. Since the 1950s, the
tourism sector saw an unprecedented boost as arrivals went from 33,000 in 1950
to 11.4 million in 1994.

Greece attracts more than 16 million tourists each year, thus contributing
18.2% to the nation's GDP in 2008 according to an OECD report. The same survey
showed that the average tourist expenditure while in Greece was $1,073,
ranking Greece 10th in the world. The number of jobs directly or indirectly
related to the tourism sector were 840,000 in 2008 and represented 19% of the
country's total labor force. In 2009, Greece welcomed over 19.3 million
tourists, a major increase from the 17.7 million tourists the country welcomed
in 2008.

Among the member states of the European Union, Greece was the most popular
destination for residents of Cyprus and Sweden in 2011.

The ministry responsible for tourism is the Ministry of Culture and Tourism,
while Greece also owns the Greek National Tourism Organization which aims in
promoting tourism in Greece.

In recent years a number of well-known tourism-related organizations have
placed Greek destinations in the top of their lists. In 2009 Lonely Planet
ranked Thessaloniki, the country's second-largest city, the world's fifth best
"Ultimate Party Town", alongside cities such as Montreal and Dubai, while in
2011 the island of Santorini was voted as the best island in the world by
Travel + Leisure. The neighbouring island of Mykonos was ranked as the 5th
best island Europe. Thessaloniki was the European Youth Capital in 2014.

## Trade and investment

The Bank of Greece/National Bank of Greece and former Ionian Bank (today Alpha
Bank) buildings in Thessaloniki

### Foreign investment

Since the fall of communism, Greece has invested heavily in neighbouring
countries in Southeast Europe. Between 1997 and 2009, 12.11% of foreign direct
investment capital in North Macedonia was Greek, ranking fourth. In 2009
alone, Greeks invested €380 million in the country, with companies such as
Hellenic Petroleum having made important strategic investments.

Greece invested €1.38 billion in Bulgaria between 2005 and 2007 and many
important companies (including Bulgarian Postbank, United Bulgarian Bank Coca-
Cola Bulgaria) are owned by Greek financial groups. In Serbia, 250 Greek
companies are active with a total investment of over €2 billion. Romanian
statistics from 2016 show that Greek investment in the country exceeded €4
billion, ranking Greece fifth or sixth among foreign investors. Greece has
been the largest investor in Albania since the fall of communism with 25% of
foreign investments in 2016 coming from Greece, in addition business relations
between both are extremely strong and continuously rising.

### Trade

During the debt crisis and subsequent COVID-19 recession, Greece's negative
balance of trade decreased significantly–from €44.3 billion in 2008 to €18.15
billion in 2020–due to a substantial drop in imports. However, the trade boom
of recent years has seen the balance approach pre-crisis levels. Exports
increased by 30.9% in 2021 and 38.3% in 2022, while imports rose by 34.6% and
43.6% during the same period. This was followed by a correction in 2023, with
exports and imports decreasing by 8.5% and 12.1% respectively. In 2024,
exports decreased by 2.1% and imports increased by 2.2%.

Greece is also the largest import partner of Cyprus (18.0%) and the largest
export partner of Palau (82.4%).

**Imports and exports in 2012** | Imports |  | Exports   
---|---|---|---  
Rank | Origin | Value  
(€ mil)  | Value  
(% of total) | Rank  | Destination | Value  
(€ mil)  | Value  
(% of total)  
0 | a | 0 |  | -1 | 0 | a | 0 | -1   
1 |  Russia | 5,967.20132 | 12.6 | 1 |  Turkey | 2,940.25203 | 10.8   
2 |  Germany | 4,381.92656 | 9.2 | 2 |  Italy | 2,033.77413 | 7.5   
3 |  Italy | 3,668.88622 | 7.7 | 3 |  Germany | 1,687.03947 | 6.2   
4 |  Saudi Arabia | 2,674.00587 | 5.6 | 4 |  Bulgaria | 1,493.75355 | 5.5   
5 |  China | 2,278.03883 | 4.8 | 5 |  Cyprus | 1,319.28598 | 4.8   
6 |  Netherlands | 2,198.57126 | 4.6 | 6 |  United States | 1,024.73686 | 3.8   
7 |  France | 1,978.48460 | 4.2 | 7 |  United Kingdom | 822.74077 | 3   
#α | OECD | 23,849.94650 | 50.2 | #α | OECD | 13,276.48107 | 48.8   
#β | G7 | 11,933.75417 | 25.1 | #β | G7 | 6,380.86705 | 23.4   
#γ | BRICS | 8,682.10265 | 18.3 | #ε | BRICS | 1,014.17146 | 3.7   
#δ | BRIC | 8,636.02946 | 18.2 | #ζ | BRIC | 977.76016 | 3.6   
#ε | OPEC | 8,090.76972 | 17 | #γ | OPEC | 2,158.60420 | 7.9   
#ζ | NAFTA | 751.80608 | 1.6 | #δ | NAFTA | 1,215.70257 | 4.5   
#a |  European Union 27 | 21,164.89314 | 44.5 | #a |  European Union 27  | 11,512.31990 | 42.3   
#b |  European Union 15 | 17,794.19344 | 37.4 | #b |  European Union 15  | 7,234.83595 | 26.6   
#3 | Africa | 2,787.39502 | 5.9 | #3 | Africa | 1,999.46534 | 7.3   
#4 | America | 1,451.15136 | 3.1  | #4 | America | 1,384.04068 | 5.1   
#2 | Asia | 14,378.02705 | 30.2 | #2  | Asia | 6,933.51200 | 25.5   
#1 | Europe | 28,708.38148 | 60.4 | #1 | Europe | 14,797.20641 | 54.4   
#5 | Oceania | 71.70603 | 0.2 | #5 | Oceania | 169.24085 | 0.6   
# | World | 47,537.63847 | 100 | # | World  | 27,211.06362 | 100   
24 | z | 1000000000000000000 | 101 | 24 | z | 1000000000000000000 | 101   
the International Organisations or Country Groups list and ranking presented
above (i.e. _#greek_letters_ and/or _#latin_letters_),  
is not indicative of the whole picture of Greece's trade;  
this is instead only an incomplete selection of some major and well known such
Organisations and Groups;  
rounding errors possibly present  
  
## Transport

The Egnatia Odos, part of European route E90. Corinth Canal OSE HQs

As of 2012, Greece had a total of 82 airports, of which 67 were paved and six
had runways longer than 3,047 meters. Of these airports, two are classified as
"international" by the Hellenic Civil Aviation Authority, but 15 offer
international services. Additionally Greece has 9 heliports. Greece does not
have a flag carrier, but the country's airline industry is dominated by Aegean
Airlines and its subsidiary Olympic Air.

Between 1975 and 2009, Olympic Airways (known after 2003 as Olympic Airlines)
was the country's state-owned flag carrier, but financial problems led to its
privatization and relaunch as Olympic Air in 2009. Both Aegean Airlines and
Olympic Air have won awards for their services; in 2009 and 2011, Aegean
Airlines was awarded the "Best regional airline in Europe" award by Skytrax,
and also has two gold and one silver awards by the ERA, while Olympic Air
holds one silver ERA award for "Airline of the Year" as well as a _"Condé Nast
Traveller 2011 Readers Choice Awards: Top Domestic Airline"_ award.

The Greek road network is made up of 116,986 km of roads, of which 1863 km are
highways, ranking 24th worldwide, as of 2016. Since the entry of Greece to the
European Community (now the European Union), a number of important projects
(such as the Egnatia Odos and the Attiki Odos) have been co-funded by the
organization, helping to upgrade the country's road network. In 2007, Greece
ranked 8th in the European Union in goods transported by road at almost 500
million tons.

Greece's rail network is estimated to be at 2,548 km. Rail transport in Greece
is operated by TrainOSE, a current subsidiary of the Ferrovie dello Stato
Italiane after the Hellenic Railways Organisation had sold its 100% stake on
the operator. Most of the country's network is standard gauge (1,565 km),
while the country also has 983 km of narrow gauge. A total of 764 km of rail
are electrified. Greece has rail connections with Bulgaria, North Macedonia
and Turkey. A total of three suburban railway systems (Proastiakos) are in
operation (in Athens, Thessaloniki and Patras), while one metro system, the
Athens Metro, is operational in Athens with another, the Thessaloniki Metro,
under construction.

According to Eurostat, Greece's largest port by tons of goods transported in
2010 is the port of Aghioi Theodoroi, with 17.38 million tons. The Port of
Thessaloniki comes second with 15.8 million tons, followed by the Port of
Piraeus, with 13.2 million tons, and the port of Eleusis, with 12.37 million
tons. The total number of goods transported through Greece in 2010 amounted to
124.38 million tons, a considerable drop from the 164.3 million tons
transported through the country in 2007. Since then, Piraeus has grown to
become the Mediterranean's third-largest port thanks to heavy investment by
Chinese logistics giant COSCO. In 2013, Piraeus was declared the fastest-
growing port in the world.

In 2010 Piraeus handled 513,319 TEUs, followed by Thessaloniki, which handled
273,282 TEUs. In the same year, 83.9 million people passed through Greece's
ports, 12.7 million through the port of Paloukia in Salamis, another 12.7
through the port of Perama, 9.5 million through Piraeus and 2.7 million
through Igoumenitsa. In 2013, Piraeus handled a record 3.16 million TEUs, the
third-largest figure in the Mediterranean, of which 2.52 million were
transported through Pier II, owned by COSCO and 644,000 were transported
through Pier I, owned by the Greek state.

## Energy

Solar-power generation potential in Greece

Energy production in Greece is dominated by the Public Power Corporation
(known mostly by its acronym ΔΕΗ, or in English DEI). In 2009 DEI supplied for
85.6% of all energy demand in Greece, while the number fell to 77.3% in 2010.
Almost half (48%) of DEI's power output is generated using lignite, a drop
from the 51.6% in 2009. Another 12% comes from Hydroelectric power plants and
another 20% from natural gas. Between 2009 and 2010, independent companies'
energy production increased by 56%, from 2,709 Gigawatt hour in 2009 to 4,232
GWh in 2010.

In 2008 renewable energy accounted for 8% of the country's total energy
consumption, a rise from the 7.2% it accounted for in 2006, but still below
the EU average of 10% in 2008. 10% of the country's renewable energy comes
from solar power, while most comes from biomass and waste recycling. In line
with the European Commission's Directive on Renewable Energy, Greece aims to
get 18% of its energy from renewable sources by 2020. In 2013 and for several
months, Greece produced more than 20% of its electricity from renewable energy
sources and hydroelectric power plants. Greece currently does not have any
nuclear power plants in operation, however in 2009 the Academy of Athens
suggested that research in the possibility of Greek nuclear power plants
begin.

Greece had 10 million barrels of proven oil reserves as of 1 January 2012.
Hellenic Petroleum is the country's largest oil company, followed by Motor Oil
Hellas. Greece's oil production stands at 1,751 barrels per day (bbl/d),
ranked 95th worldwide, while it exports 19,960 bbl/d, ranked 53rd, and imports
355,600 bbl/d, ranked 25th.

In 2011 the Greek government approved the start of oil exploration and
drilling in three locations within Greece, with an estimated output of 250 to
300 million barrels over the next 15 to 20 years. The estimated output in
euros of the three deposits is €25 billion over a 15-year period, of which
€13–€14 billion will enter state coffers. Greece's dispute with Turkey over
the Aegean poses substantial obstacles to oil exploration in the Aegean Sea.

In addition to the above, Greece is also to start oil and gas exploration in
other locations in the Ionian Sea, as well as the Libyan Sea, within the Greek
exclusive economic zone, south of Crete. The Ministry of the Environment,
Energy and Climate Change announced that there was interest from various
countries (including Norway and the United States) in exploration, and the
first results regarding the amount of oil and gas in these locations were
expected in the summer of 2012. In November 2012, a report published by
Deutsche Bank estimated the value of natural gas reserves south of Crete at
€427 billion.

A number of oil and gas pipelines are currently under construction or under
planning in the country. Such projects include the _Interconnector Turkey-
Greece-Italy_ (ITGI) and _South Stream_ gas pipelines.

EuroAsia Interconnector will electrically connect Attica and Crete in Greece
with Cyprus and Israel with 2000 MW HVDC undersea power cable. EuroAsia
Interconnector is specially important for isolated systems, like Cyprus and
Crete. Crete is energetically isolated from mainland Greece and Hellenic
Republic covers for Crete electricity costs difference of around €300 million
per year.

  * Amyntaio Power Plant

  * Agios Dimitrios Power Plant

  * View of a wind farm, Panachaiko mountain

  * Prinos oil field near Kavala

  * Plastiras Hydroelectric Dam

## Taxation and tax evasion

Revenues of Greece between 1999 and 2010 as a percentage of GDP, compared to
the EU average.

Greece has a tiered tax system based on progressive taxation. Greek law
recognizes six categories of taxable income: immovable property, movable
property (investment), income from agriculture, business, employment, and
income from professional activities. Greece's personal income tax rate, until
recently, ranged from 0% for annual incomes below €12,000 to 45% for annual
incomes over €100,000. Under the new 2010 tax reform, tax exemptions have been
abolished.

Also under the new austerity measures and among other changes, the personal
income tax-free ceiling has been reduced to €5,000 per annum while further
future changes, for example abolition of this ceiling, are already being
planned.

Greece's corporate tax dropped from 40% in 2000 to 20% in 2010. For 2011 only,
corporate tax was at 24%. Value added tax (VAT) has gone up in 2010 compared
to 2009: 23% as opposed to 19%.

The lowest VAT possible is 6.5% (previously 4.5%) for newspapers, periodicals
and cultural event tickets, while a tax rate of 13% (from 9%) applies to
certain service sector professions. Additionally, both employers and employees
have to pay social contribution taxes, which apply at a rate of 16% for white
collar jobs and 19.5% for blue collar jobs, and are used for social insurance.
In 2017 the VAT tax rate was 24% with minor exceptions, 13% reduced for some
basic foodstuffs which will be soon abolished and everything, as it seems,
will soon go to 24% in order to fight the phantom of tax evasion.[_needs
update_]

The Ministry of Finance expected tax revenues for 2012 to be €52.7 billion
(€23.6 billion in direct taxes and €29.1 billion in indirect taxes), an
increase of 5.8% from 2011. In 2012, the government was expected to have
considerably higher tax revenues than in 2011 on a number of sectors,
primarily housing (an increase of 217.5% from 2011).

### Tax evasion

Greece suffers from very high levels of tax evasion. In the last quarter of
2005, tax evasion reached 49%, while in January 2006 it fell to 41.6%. It is
worth noting that the newspaper Ethnos which published these figures went
bankrupt; it is no longer published and some sources suggest that the
information it had published was highly debatable. A study by researchers from
the University of Chicago concluded that tax evasion in 2009 by self-employed
professionals alone in Greece (accountants, dentists, lawyers, doctors,
personal tutors and independent financial advisers) was €28 billion or 31% of
the budget deficit that year.

Greece's "shadow economy" was estimated at 24.3% of GDP in 2012, compared with
28.6% for Estonia, 26.5% for Latvia, 21.6% for Italy, 17.1% for Belgium, 14.7%
for Sweden, 13.7% for Finland, and 13.5% for Germany, and is certainly related
to the fact that the percentage of Greeks that are self-employed is more than
double the EU average (2013 est.).

The Tax Justice Network estimated in 2011 that there were over 20 billion
euros in Swiss bank accounts held by Greeks. The former Finance Minister of
Greece, Evangelos Venizelos, was quoted as saying, "Around 15,000 individuals
and companies owe the taxman 37 billion euros". Additionally, the TJN put the
number of Greek-owned off-shore companies at over 10,000.

In 2012, Swiss estimates suggested that Greeks had some 20 billion euros in
Switzerland of which only one percent had been declared as taxable in Greece.
Estimates in 2015 were even more dramatic. They indicated that the amount due
to the government of Greece from Greeks' accounts in Swiss banks totaled
around 80 billion euros.

A mid-2017 report indicated Greeks have been "taxed to the hilt" and many
believed that the risk of penalties for tax evasion were less serious than the
risk of bankruptcy. One method of evasion is the so-called black market, grey
economy or shadow economy: work is done for cash payment which is not declared
as income; as well, VAT is not collected and remitted. A January 2017 report
by the DiaNEOsis think-tank indicated that unpaid taxes in Greece at the time
totaled approximately 95 billion euros, up from 76 billion euros in 2015, much
of it was expected to be uncollectable. Another early 2017 study estimated
that the loss to the government as a result of tax evasion was between 6% and
9% of the country's GDP, or roughly between 11 billion and 16 billion euros
per annum.

The shortfall in the collection of VAT (sales tax) is also significant. In
2014, the government collected 28% less than was owed to it; this shortfall
was about double the average for the EU. The uncollected amount that year was
about 4.9 billion euros. The DiaNEOsis study estimated that 3.5% of GDP is
lost due to VAT fraud, while losses due to smuggling of alcohol, tobacco and
petrol amounted to approximately another 0.5% of the country's GDP.

#### Planned solutions

Following similar actions by the United Kingdom and Germany, the Greek
government was in talks with Switzerland in 2011, attempting to force Swiss
banks to reveal information on the back accounts of Greek citizens. The
Ministry of Finance stated that Greeks with Swiss bank accounts would either
be required to pay a tax or reveal information such as the identity of the
bank account holder to the Greek internal revenue services. The Greek and
Swiss governments were to reach a deal on the matter by the end of 2011.

The solution demanded by Greece still had not been effected as of 2015. That
year, estimates indicated that the amount of evaded taxes stored in Swiss
banks was around 80 billion euros. By then, however, a tax treaty to address
this issue was under serious negotiation between the Greek and Swiss
governments. An agreement was finally ratified by Switzerland on 1 March 2016
creating a new tax transparency law that would allow for a more effective
battle against tax evasion. Starting in 2018, banks in both Greece and
Switzerland will exchange information about the bank accounts of citizens of
the other country to minimize the possibility of hiding untaxed income.

In 2016 and 2017, the government was encouraging the use of credit cards or
debit cards to pay for goods and services in order to reduce cash only
payments. By January 2017, taxpayers were only granted tax-allowances or
deductions when payments were made electronically, with a "paper trail" of the
transactions that the government could easily audit. This was expected to
reduce the problem of businesses taking payments but not issuing an invoice;
that tactic had been used by various companies to avoid payment of VAT (sales)
tax as well as income tax.

By 28 July 2017, numerous businesses were required by law to install a point
of sale device to enable them to accept payment by credit or debit card.
Failure to comply with the electronic payment facility can lead to fines of up
to 1,500 euros. The requirement applied to around 400,000 firms or individuals
in 85 professions. The greater use of cards was one of the factors that had
already achieved significant increases in VAT collection in 2016.

## Wealth and standards of living

### National and regional GDP

GDP per capita of the regions of Greece in 2008. The country's two largest
metropolitan areas account for almost 62% of the national economy.

Greece's most economically important regions are Attica, which contributed
€87.378 billion to the economy in 2018, and Central Macedonia, which
contributed €25.558 billion. The smallest regional economies were those of the
North Aegean (€2.549 billion) and Ionian Islands (€3.257 billion).

In terms of GDP per capita, Attica (€23,300) far outranks any other Greek
region. The poorest regions in 2018 were the North Aegean (€11,800), Eastern
Macedonia and Thrace (€11,900) and Epirus (€12,200). At the national level,
GDP per capita in 2018 was €17,200.

**Regional GDP, 2018** Rank  | Region  | GDP  
(€, billions)  | Share in EU-27/national GDP  
(%)  | GDP  
per capita  
(€)  | GDP  
per capita  
(PPS)  | GDP  
per capita  
(€, EU27=100)  | GDP  
per capita  
(PPS, EU27=100)  | GDP  
per person employed  
(PPS, EU27=100)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
0 | a | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0   
1 | Attica | 87.378 | 47.3 | 23,300 | 28,000 | 77 | 93 | 99   
2 | Central Macedonia | 25.558 | 13.8 | 13,600 | 16,400 | 45 | 54 | 69   
3 | Thessaly | 9.658 | 5.2 | 13,400 | 16,100 | 44 | 53 | 65   
4 | Crete | 9.386 | 5.1 | 14,800 | 17,800 | 49 | 59 | 68   
5 | Central Greece | 8.767 | 4.7 | 15,800 | 18,900 | 52 | 63 | 81   
6 | Western Greece | 8.322 | 4.5 | 12,700 | 15,200 | 42 | 50 | 65   
7 | Peloponnese | 8.245 | 4.5 | 14,300 | 17,200 | 48 | 57 | 68   
8 | Eastern Macedonia and Thrace | 7.166 | 3.9 | 11,900 | 14,300 | 40 | 48 | 61   
9 | South Aegean | 6.387 | 3.5 | 18,700 | 22,400 | 62 | 74 | 79   
10 | Epirus | 4.077 | 2.2 | 12,200 | 14,700 | 40 | 49 | 63   
11 | Western Macedonia | 3.963 | 2.1 | 14,800 | 17,700 | 49 | 59 | 79   
12 | Ionian Islands | 3.257 | 1.8 | 16,000 | 19,100 | 53 | 63 | 71   
13 | North Aegean | 2.549 | 1.4 | 11,800 | 14,200 | 39 | 47 | 67   
– | Greece | 184.714 | 1 | 17,200 | 20,700 | 57 | 69 | 81   
– | EU27 | 13,483.857 | 100 | 30,200 | 30,200 | 100 | 100 | 100   
100 | z | 1000000000000000 | 1000 | 100 | 1000000000 | 1000   
  
### Welfare state

Greece is a welfare state which provides a number of social services such as
quasi-universal health care and pensions. In the 2012 budget, expenses for the
welfare state (excluding education) stand at an estimated €22.487 billion
(€6.577 billion for pensions and €15.910 billion for social security and
health care expenses), or 31.9% of the all state expenses.

## Largest companies by revenue 2024

According to the 2024 Forbes Global 2000 index, Greece's largest publicly
traded companies are:

**Forbes Global 2000** Rank | Company | Revenues  
(€ billion) | Profit  
(€ billion) | Assets  
(€ billion)  
---|---|---|---|---  
1 | Eurobank Ergasias | 6.1  | 1.3  | 85.7   
2 | National Bank of Greece | 3.9  | 1.3  | 78.2   
3 | Piraeus Bank | 3.7  | 0.9  | 83.4   
4 | Alpha Bank | 4.7  | 0.7  | 80.3   
5 | Bank of Greece | 7.5  | 0.1  | 250.2   
6 | Motor Oil Hellas | 14.4  | 0.8  | 8.4   
7 | Hellenic Petroleum | 14.1  | 0.6  | 9.0   
8 | Public Power Corporation | 8.8  | 0.4  | 21.2   
  
## Labour force

### Working hours

In 2011, 53.3 percent of employed persons worked more than 40 to 49 hours a
week and 24.8 percent worked more than 50 hours a week, totaling up to 78.1
percent of employed persons working 40 or more hours a week. When accounting
for varying age groups, the percentage of employees working 40 to 49 hours a
week peaked in the 25 to 29 age range. As workers got older, they gradually
decreased in percentage working 40 to 49 hours, but increased in working 50+
hours, suggesting a correlation that as employees grow older, they work more
hours. Of different occupation groups, skilled agricultural, forestry, and
fishery workers and managers were the most likely to work 50+ hours; however,
they do not take up a significant portion of the labor force, only 14.3
percent. In 2014, the average number of working hours for Greek employees was
2124 hours, ranking as the third highest among OECD countries and the highest
in the Eurozone.

Recent trends in employment indicate that the number of working hours will
decrease in the future due to the rise of part-time work. Since 2011, average
working hours have decreased. In 1998, Greece passed legislation introducing
part-time employment in public services with the goal of reducing
unemployment, increasing the total, but decreasing the average number of hours
worked per employee. Whether the legislation was successful in increasing
public-sector part-time work, labor market trends show that part-time
employment has increased from 7.7 percent in 2007 to 11 percent in 2016 of
total employment. Both men and women have had the part-time share of
employment increase over this period. While women still constitute a majority
of part-time workers, recently men have been taking a larger share of part-
time employment.

## Currency

Between 1832 and 2002 the currency of Greece was the drachma. After signing
the Maastricht Treaty, Greece applied to join the eurozone. The two main
convergence criteria were a maximum budget deficit of 3% of GDP and a
declining public debt if it stood above 60% of GDP. Greece met the criteria as
shown in its 1999 annual public account. On 1 January 2001, Greece joined the
eurozone, with the adoption of the euro at the fixed exchange rate ₯340.75 to
€1. However, in 2001 the euro only existed electronically, so the physical
exchange from drachma to euro only took place on 1 January 2002. This was
followed by a ten-year period for eligible exchange of drachma to euro, which
ended on 1 March 2012.

Prior to the adoption of the euro, 64% of Greek citizens viewed the new
currency positively, but in February 2005 this figure fell to 26% and by June
2005 it fell further to 20%. Since 2010 the figure has risen again, and a
survey in September 2011 showed that 63% of Greek citizens viewed of the euro
positively.

## Charts gallery

  * Greek social expenditures as a percentage of GDP (1998–2009)

  * Distribution of income in Greece over the years

  * Distribution of total income in Greece over the years

  * Employment and unemployment in Greece since 2004

  * Greek GDP, Debt (various) and Budget Deficit over the years

  * Greek GDP, Debt and Deficit (Int. 1990 Geary-Khamis dollars)

  * Greek bank deposits (including repos) since 1998

  * Domestic bank deposits of Greek households by type of account

  * Domestic lending by domestic banks in Greece since 1980

  * House Price Index, Greece (including flats)

## Poverty rate

As a result of the recession sparked by the public debt crisis, poverty has
increased. The rate of people at risk of poverty or social exclusion reached a
high of 36% in 2014, before subsiding over the following years to 26.1% in
2023. The rate of extreme poverty rose to 15% in 2015, up from 8.9% in 2011
and a huge increase from 2009 when it did not exceed 2.2%. In 2015, the rate
among children aged 0–17 was 17.6% and for young people aged 18–29 the rate
was 24.4%. With unemployment on the rise, those without jobs between 2012 and
2015 were at the highest risk of poverty (70–75%), up from less than 50% in
2011. Those out of work lose their health insurance after two years, further
exacerbating the poverty rate. Younger unemployed people tend to rely on the
older generations of their families for financial support. However, long-term
unemployment has depleted pension funds due to fewer workers making social
security contributions, resulting in higher poverty rates in intergenerational
households reliant on the reduced pensions received by their retired members.
Over the course of the economic crisis, Greeks have endured significant job
losses and wage cuts, as well as deep cuts to workers' compensation and
welfare benefits. From 2008 to 2013, Greeks became 40% poorer on average, and
in 2014 saw their disposable household income drop below 2003 levels.

| This graph was using the legacy Graph extension, which is no longer
supported. It needs to be converted to the new Chart extension.  
---|---  
  
IMF projection (%)

Actual unemployment rate (%)