| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( January 2021)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy ofPanama** is based mainly on the tourism and services sector,
which accounts for nearly 80% of its GDP and accounts for most of its foreign
income. Services include banking, commerce, insurance, container ports, and
flagship registry, medical and health and tourism. Historically, the Panama
Canal (and the nearby Colón Free Trade Zone) was the key source of Panama's
income, but its importance has been displaced by the services sector.

The country's industry includes the manufacturing of aircraft spare parts,
cement, drinks, adhesives, and textiles. Additionally, exports from Panama
include bananas, shrimp, sugar, coffee, and clothing. Panama's economy is
fully dollarized, with the US dollar being legal tender in the country. Panama
was the first foreign country to adopt the U.S. dollar as its legal currency
(1903) after its secession from Colombia (with U.S. help) temporarily deprived
it of a local currency. Panama is a high income economy with a history of low
inflation.

## Economic history

Since the early 16th century, Panama's geographic location gave the country a
comparative advantage. From the earliest Spanish times, ports on each coast
and a trail between them handled much of Spain's colonial trade to the benefit
of the inhabitants of the port cities.

Panama has always been dependent on world commerce for its prosperity, and it
is affected by the cyclical nature of international trade. The economy
stagnated in the 18th century as colonial exchange via the isthmus declined.
In the mid-19th century, Panama's economy boomed as a result of increased
cargo and passengers associated with the California Gold Rush. A railroad
across the isthmus, completed in 1855, extended economic growth for about
fifteen years until completion of the first transcontinental railroad in the
United States led to a decline in trans-isthmian traffic.

France's efforts to construct a canal across the isthmus in the 1880s and
efforts by the United States in the early 20th century stimulated the
Panamanian economy. The United States completed the canal in 1914. However,
the world depression of the 1930s reduced international trade and canal
traffic, causing widespread unemployment in the terminal cities and generating
a flow of workers to subsistence farming. During World War II, canal traffic
did not increase, but the economy boomed as the convoy system and the presence
of United States forces, sent to defend the canal, increased foreign spending
in the canal cities. The end of the war was followed by an economic depression
and another movement of unemployed people into agriculture.

The postwar depression gave way to rapid economic expansion between 1950 and
1970. All sectors contributed to the growth. Agricultural output rose, and
commerce evolved into a relatively sophisticated wholesale and retail system.
Banking, tourism, and the export of services to the Canal Zone grew rapidly.
Most importantly, an increase in world trade provided a major stimulus to use
of the canal and to the economy.

In the 1970s and 1980s, Panama's growth fluctuated with the vagaries of the
world economy. After 1973, economic expansion slowed considerably as a result
of a number of international and domestic factors. In the early 1980s, the
economy rebounded. The acute recession in Latin America after 1982, however,
wreaked havoc on Panama's economy. This period coincided with the rise to
power of General Manuel Noriega during which Panama became increasingly
indebted.

The United States started to pursue Noriega, culminating in sanctions that
froze Panama's assets in the United States, and because Panama used the US
dollar it was forced to default on its IMF debt in 1987. Economic turmoil in
the country included a general strike and the banking system closing down for
two months. The United States invaded Panama in 1989 and forced the surrender
of Noriega. Panama regained access to IMF funds in 1992.

After taking office in 1994, President Ernesto Perez Balladares instituted an
economic liberalization program designed to liberalize the trade regime,
attract foreign investment, privatize state-owned enterprises, institute
fiscal discipline. After two years of near-stagnation, there was strong GDP
growth in 1997–1998. The most important sectors which drove growth were the
Panama Canal and the shipping and port activities of the Colón Free Trade
Zone.

During the Moscoso administration beginning in 1999, Moscoso attempted to
strengthen social programs. Moscoso's administration successfully handled the
Panama Canal transfer and was effective in the administration of the Canal.

Under the Martín Torrijos administration beginning in 2004, Panama continued
strong economic growth and initiated the 2007–2016 Panama Canal expansion
project. The canal expansion doubled the waterway capacity. Strong economic
performance had reduced the national poverty level to 29% in 2008.

In 2008, Panama had the second most unequal income distribution in Latin
America. The Torrijos government implemented tax reforms, as well as social
security reforms, and backed regional trade agreements and development of
tourism. Not a CAFTA signatory, Panama in December 2006 independently
negotiated a free trade agreement with the US.

In May 2009, Ricardo Martinelli was elected president, and promised to promote
free trade, establish a metro system, and complete the expansion plan for the
Panama Canal.

Panama's economic role has been compared to that of Singapore: commentators
have described the country as "the Singapore of central America", although
Panama's involvement in the Odebrecht scandal has dealt a blow to official
attempts to market Panama using this expression.

## Economic sectors

### Financial services

Panama has a substantial financial services sector and no central bank to act
as a lender of last resort to rescue banks that get in trouble. As a result,
Panamanian banks are very conservatively run, with an average capital adequacy
ratio of 15.6% in 2012, nearly double the legal minimum. The sector grew up
providing trade finance for trade passing through the Canal, and later evolved
into money laundering for the drug trade under Noriega. Since the 2008
financial crisis, the country has been trying to shake off its reputation as a
tax haven, signing double taxation treaties with many (mostly OECD) countries
and in April 2011 a treaty on the exchange of financial information with the
United States.

### Agriculture

Maize cultivation in Panama.

Agriculture in Panama is an important sector of the Panamanian economy. Major
agricultural products include bananas, cocoa beans, coffee, coconuts, timber,
beef, chicken, shrimp, corn, potatoes, rice, soybeans, and sugar cane.

In 2009 agriculture and fisheries made up 7.4% of Panama's GDP. Panama is a
net food importer and the U.S. is its main supplier. Agriculture employs many
Panamanians (in relation to agriculture's percentage of Panamanian GDP)
because many farmers are engaged in subsistence farming.

### Mining

| This article needs to be **updated**. The reason given is: petaquilla's gold
mine has been abandoned since an unconstitutionality ruling was rendered
against it. Rise in GDP percentage with cobre Panama's operations. Please help
update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.
_( April 2024)_  
---|---  
The mineral-mining industry of Panama accounted for about 1% of the country's
GDP in 2006. This does not include any manufacturing of mineral commodities,
such as cement or petroleum refinery products.

An economic activity map of Panama, 1981.

### Real estate

The Republic of Panama's real estate industry relies on foreign investment.
The sector has grown since 2006, as such investment has helped to fuel
Panama's economy and housing market.

In spite of the economic and housing market growth, poverty is a problem in
Panama. Most indigenous people live in extreme poverty while others located in
rural areas live in basic poverty. Lack of sanitation, electricity, basic
water, health, and education amongst the poor is a serious problem affecting
Panama’s housing conditions.

In an attempt to encourage foreign investments for real estate projects and
infrastructure, the government of Panama enacted laws protecting foreigners
and citizens who make investments.

Corruption permeates the real estate market including claims of drug profits
and money laundering financing real estate projects.

Similar to the U.S. and Canada, Panama uses a system of publicly recorded
titled deeds as proof of real estate ownership. A unique Rights of Possession
system exists allowing individuals to occupy unused government lands in order
to make improvements to them.

## Taxation

Taxation in Panama, which is governed by the Fiscal Code, is on a territorial
basis; this is to say, that taxes apply only to income or gains derived
through business carried on in Panama itself. The existence of a sales or
administration office in Panama, or the re-invoicing of external transactions
at a profit, does not of itself give rise to taxation if the underlying
transactions take place outside Panama. Dividends paid out of such earnings
are free of taxation.

In February 2005, Panama's unicameral legislature approved a major fiscal
reform package in order to raise revenues from new business taxes, and
increases the country's level of debt. The legislature voted 46 to 28 in
favour of the measures, which include a new 1.4% tax on companies’ gross
revenues, and a 1% levy on firms operating in the Colón Free Trade Zone – the
largest free port in the Americas.

### Further reforms

President Ricardo Martinelli had promised to implement a flat tax system with
a flat tax of 10% and which promised to raise revenues, put inflation under
control and which will allow enormous real wage gains.[_citation needed_]
Instead the Martinelli government increased sales tax to 7% from 5%, as well
as increasing other taxes, in order to finance many infrastructure projects
around the country.

The current VAT rates are: 7% (standard rate); 15% (tobacco); 10% (alcohol and
hotels); 5% (essential goods). The corporate tax rate is 25%, while the
highest marginal income tax rate is 27%.

### As tax haven

The Republic of Panama is one of the oldest and best-known tax havens in the
Caribbean, as well as one of the most established in the region. Panama has
had a reputation for tax avoidance since the early 20th century, and Panama
has been cited repeatedly in recent years as a jurisdiction which does not
cooperate with international tax transparency initiatives.

Panama's offshore sector is intimately tied to the Panama Canal, which has
made it a gateway and _entrepôt_ for international trade. There are strong
similarities between Panama and other leading tax havens like Hong Kong,
Singapore and Dubai. On paper at least, Panama has the largest shipping fleet
in the world, greater than those of the US and China combined, according to
the Tax Justice Network.

## Transportation

In Panama City there are six highways: the Panama-Arraijan Bridge of the
Americas, Panama-Arraijan Centennial Bridge, Arraijan-Chorrera, Corredor
Norte, Corredor Sur, and Autopista Panama-Colon.

Panama's roads, traffic and transportation systems are generally safe, with
older traffic lights having undergone a recent overhaul and most have been
replaced by traffic lights that are capable of being controlled [and changed]
remotely, even at busy intersections where they are not needed. Driving during
the midday is usually slow and demanding due to dense traffic, frequent
traffic jams, and street renovation programs. On roads where poor lighting and
driving conditions prevail, night driving is difficult and in many cases,
restricted by local authorities, this usually occurs in informal settlements.
Night driving is particularly hazardous in these areas. Traffic in Panama
moves on the right, and Panamanian law requires that drivers and passengers
wear seat belts.

Currently, Panama used to have an extensive and efficient, yet confusing to
tourists, form of public transportation consisting of colorful painted buses
colloquially known as __diablo rojo__. A __diablo rojo__ is usually
"customized" or painted with bright colors, usually depicting famous actors,
politicians or singers. It is now popular all over the city (and also in
neighboring towns) for bus drivers to personally customize the interior and
exterior of their __diablo rojo__. Panama City's streets experience frequent
traffic jams due to poor planning.

"Diablos Rojos" are not allowed to operate in Panama city since 2010, except
for recreational purposes. The Metrobus and the Metro are the only available
public transportation methods.

## Statistics

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2019 (with IMF
staff estimates in 2020–2026). Inflation below 5% is in green.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$nominal) | GDP per capita (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 7.0  | 3,530.8  | 4.1  | 2,071.0  | 4.5%  | 13.8%  | 8.4%  | n/a   
1981  | 8.4  | 4,120.3  | 4.6  | 2,288.4  | 9.2%  | 7.3%  | 9.2%  | n/a   
1982  | 9.4  | 4,501.2  | 5.1  | 2,469.1  | 5.3%  | 4.3%  | 11.0%  | n/a   
1983  | 9.3  | 4,365.3  | 5.3  | 2,477.1  | -4.5%  | 2.1%  | 11.6%  | n/a   
1984  | 9.9  | 4,540.9  | 5.5  | 2,527.5  | 2.7%  | 1.6%  | 12.2%  | n/a   
1985  | 10.7  | 4,807.3  | 5.8  | 2,614.8  | 4.9%  | 1.0%  | 14.4%  | n/a   
1986  | 11.3  | 4,969.0  | 6.0  | 2,658.3  | 3.6%  | -0.1%  | 12.5%  | n/a   
1987  | 11.4  | 4,893.2  | 6.1  | 2,613.1  | -1.8%  | 1.0%  | 14.1%  | n/a   
1988  | 10.2  | 4,295.8  | 5.3  | 2,211.7  | -13.4%  | 0.4%  | 18.8%  | n/a   
1989  | 10.8  | 4,440.3  | 5.3  | 2,171.7  | 1.6%  | 0.1%  | 18.9%  | n/a   
1990  | 12.1  | 4,878.5  | 5.7  | 2,313.0  | 8.1%  | 0.8%  | 16.7%  | n/a   
1991  | 13.7  | 5,402.2  | 6.3  | 2,489.7  | 9.4%  | 1.5%  | 16.0%  | n/a   
1992  | 15.1  | 5,853.3  | 7.2  | 2,771.0  | 8.2%  | 1.8%  | 14.7%  | n/a   
1993  | 16.3  | 6,188.0  | 7.8  | 2,963.3  | 5.5%  | 0.5%  | 13.3%  | n/a   
1994  | 17.1  | 6,367.1  | 8.3  | 3,095.2  | 2.8%  | 1.3%  | 14.0%  | 81.2%   
1995  | 17.8  | 6,480.3  | 8.5  | 3,099.9  | 1.8%  | 0.9%  | 14.0%  | 79.5%   
1996  | 19.5  | 6,941.6  | 10.0  | 3,580.9  | 7.4%  | 1.3%  | 14.3%  | 67.4%   
1997  | 21.1  | 7,366.9  | 10.8  | 3,791.3  | 6.5%  | 1.3%  | 13.4%  | 62.4%   
1998  | 22.9  | 7,834.9  | 11.8  | 4,027.3  | 7.3%  | 0.6%  | 11.6%  | 60.3%   
1999  | 24.1  | 8,088.6  | 12.3  | 4,136.1  | 3.9%  | 1.3%  | 9.5%  | 57.4%   
2000  | 25.3  | 8,328.9  | 12.5  | 4,111.7  | 2.7%  | 1.4%  | 13.5%  | 55.8%   
2001  | 26.0  | 8,394.2  | 12.7  | 4,095.0  | 0.6%  | 0.3%  | 14.0%  | 60.2%   
2002  | 27.0  | 8,545.6  | 13.2  | 4,172.7  | 2.2%  | 1.0%  | 13.5%  | 59.3%   
2003  | 28.7  | 8,907.5  | 13.9  | 4,312.6  | 4.2%  | 0.1%  | 13.0%  | 58.8%   
2004  | 31.7  | 9,647.3  | 15.3  | 4,638.7  | 7.5%  | 0.5%  | 11.7%  | 61.2%   
2005  | 35.1  | 10,466.2  | 16.6  | 4,965.2  | 7.2%  | 2.9%  | 9.8%  | 61.7%   
2006  | 39.2  | 11,496.5  | 18.4  | 5,401.6  | 8.5%  | 2.5%  | 8.7%  | 56.9%   
2007  | 45.2  | 12,999.8  | 21.3  | 6,127.0  | 12.1%  | 4.2%  | 6.4%  | 49.4%   
2008  | 50.6  | 14,298.8  | 25.2  | 7,110.2  | 9.9%  | 8.8%  | 5.6%  | 41.6%   
2009  | 51.5  | 14,318.3  | 27.1  | 7,532.4  | 1.2%  | 2.4%  | 6.6%  | 41.6%   
2010  | 55.2  | 15,076.0  | 29.4  | 8,039.8  | 5.8%  | 3.5%  | 6.5%  | 40.5%   
2011  | 62.7  | 16,845.1  | 34.7  | 9,314.7  | 11.3%  | 5.9%  | 4.5%  | 37.8%   
2012  | 70.4  | 18,596.3  | 40.4  | 10,674.5  | 9.8%  | 5.7%  | 4.1%  | 36.0%   
2013  | 79.8  | 20,727.2  | 45.6  | 11,841.9  | 6.9%  | 4.0%  | 4.1%  | 35.6%   
2014  | 89.3  | 22,827.4  | 49.9  | 12,757.0  | 5.1%  | 2.6%  | 4.8%  | 36.6%   
2015  | 100.5  | 25,275.2  | 54.1  | 13,606.6  | 5.7%  | 0.1%  | 5.1%  | 36.0%   
2016  | 112.3  | 27,828.8  | 57.9  | 14,344.1  | 5.0%  | 0.7%  | 5.5%  | 35.3%   
2017  | 125.0  | 30,511.0  | 62.2  | 15,178.3  | 5.6%  | 0.9%  | 6.1%  | 35.3%   
2018  | 132.6  | 31,891.9  | 64.9  | 15,612.3  | 3.6%  | 0.8%  | 6.0%  | 37.3%   
2019  | 139.1  | 32,973.2  | 66.8  | 15,831.0  | 3.0%  | -0.4%  | 7.1%  | 42.2%   
2020  | 115.5  | 26,998.8  | 52.9  | 12,373.0  | -17.9%  | -1.6%  | 18.5%  | 66.3%   
2021  | 134.0  | 30,889.2  | 60.1  | 13,861.1  | 12.0%  | 1.4%  | 10.2%  | 62.2%   
2022  | 144.6  | 32,886.6  | 64.4  | 14,643.9  | 5.0%  | 2.0%  | 9.2%  | 61.2%   
2023  | 155.4  | 34,896.8  | 68.9  | 15,481.4  | 5.0%  | 2.0%  | 8.9%  | 60.6%   
2024  | 166.9  | 37,005.5  | 73.8  | 16,372.1  | 5.0%  | 2.0%  | 8.9%  | 59.1%   
2025  | 179.0  | 39,212.6  | 79.1  | 17,319.3  | 5.0%  | 2.0%  | 8.9%  | 57.2%   
2026  | 191.9  | 41,522.5  | 84.7  | 18,326.5  | 5.0%  | 2.0%  | 8.9%  | 55.4%   
  
Nominal GDP per capita in Panama was (in balboas or US dollars) 11,691 in
2002, 13,099 in 2004, 14,004 in 2005 (Prelim), 15,141.9 in 2006 (est), as
reported by Office of Statistics and Census, Government of Panama. Growth from
2002 to 2006 was especially strong in the transport and communications sector,
which became the biggest component of GDP, although many sectors also saw
strong growth. Real GDP rose 7.5% (2003–04), 6.9% (2004–05), 8.1% (2005–06).

GDP growth in 2008 was 9.2%, reflecting a slowing of the robust growth of
11.5% seen in 2007. Although growth slowed to 2.4% in the first half of 2009,
due to the global economic downturn, it is expected to improve in 2010 and is
still one of the most positive growth rates in the region. Growth has been
fueled by the construction sector, transportation, port and Panama Canal-
related activities, and tourism. As a result of this growth, government
deficit as a percentage of GDP dropped to 43% in 2009, and government-issued
debt achieved investment grade in February 2010. A recent United Nations
report highlighted progress in poverty reduction from 2001 to 2007—overall
poverty fell from 37% to 29%, and extreme poverty fell from 19% to 12%.
However, Panama still has the second-most unequal income distribution in Latin
America.