| This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( May 2023)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy of Eritrea** has undergone extreme changes after the War of
Independence. It experienced considerable growth in recent years, indicated by
an improvement in gross domestic product in 2011 of 8.7 percent and in 2012 of
7.5% over 2011, and has a total of $8.090 billion as of 2020. However, worker
remittances from abroad are estimated to account for 32 percent of gross
domestic product.

Eritrea has an extensive amount of resources such as copper, gold, granite,
marble, and potash. As of 2012, 20 mining companies had obtained licenses to
prospect and exploit mines.

## Economic history

Eritrea's recent economic growth has been characterised by considerable
volatility, partly due to its dependence on predominantly rainfed agriculture,
which accounts for about one-third of the economy. The sector is also affected
by distribution services, which account for about 20 per cent of GDP, and
mining, which accounts for another 20 per cent of the economy. Real GDP growth
is estimated to have recovered to around 12% in 2018, after an average
contraction of -2.7% between 2015 and 2018, caused by frequent droughts and
lower mining output.

Reported inflation in Eritrea was negative between 2016 and 2018, following
the exchange of currency in circulation in November 2015, which led to a
contraction in the money supply. Deflation persisted in 2018, as increased
trade with Ethiopia exerted additional downward pressure on prices.

In recent years, Eritrea has pursued a tighter fiscal policy to address
persistent deficits that emerged after the intensification of regional
instability in 1998. By 2018, the country recorded a fiscal surplus of about
11 % of GDP, mainly due to significant reductions in capital expenditures and
the introduction of some revenue-raising measures. However, current fiscal
pressures, including recurrent and labour-related expenditures, are expected
to increase.

Short-term growth prospects remain challenging due to fiscal constraints and
limited opportunities under existing restrictions. The recovery in the
agricultural sector is expected to slow. Eritrea continues to face a difficult
macroeconomic environment, characterized by an unsustainable debt
burden—including arrears to the World Bank—as well as vulnerabilities in the
financial and external sectors.

## Gross domestic product (GDP)

Eritrea's GDP, estimated at $4.037 billion in 2011, was 8.7 percent above the
GDP in 2010. The growth was due to increased agricultural output and the
expansion of the mining industry along with increasing gold prices. Breakdowns
of the Eritrean economy by sector have not been readily available; however,
according to some estimates, in 2011 services accounted for 55 percent of the
GDP, industry for 34 percent, and agriculture for the remaining 11 percent.
The growth of the GDP, however, is compromised by the ongoing tensions with
the country's borders.

## Industries

### Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing

In 2004, agriculture employed nearly 80 percent of the population but
accounted for only 12.4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in Eritrea.
The agricultural sector has improved with the use of modern farming equipment
and techniques, and dams. Nevertheless, it is compromised by a lack of
financial services and investment. Major agricultural products are sorghum,
barley, beans, dairy products, lentils, meat, millet, leather, teff, and
wheat. The displacement of 1 million Eritreans as a result of the war with
Ethiopia, and the widespread presence of land mines have played a role in the
declining productivity of the agricultural sector. Almost a quarter of the
country's most productive land remains[_when?_] unoccupied because of the
lingering effects of the 1998–2000 war with Ethiopia.[_citation needed_]

Forestry is not a significant economic activity in Eritrea.

As of 2011, the government encouraged large-scale cultivation of cactus to
help alleviate the human suffering and, in the future, increase export
revenues. Cactus plants are said to have been introduced in 1839 by a French
Catholic missionary who planted the cactus in Digsa, Akrur and Hebo, Southern
region. The second generation of cactus plants were introduced by the
Italians, who planted them at Arberebu while they were building the Asmara
rail lines.

Reliable figures on the extent and value of the fishing industry in Eritrea
are difficult to obtain. However, Eritrea's long coastline offers the
opportunity for significant expansion of the fishing industry from its
current, largely artisanal, stage. Eritrea exports fish and sea cucumbers from
the Red Sea to markets in Europe and Asia, and there is hope that the
construction of a new, jet-capable airport in Massawa, as well as
rehabilitation of the port there, may support increased exports of high-value
seafood. In 2002, exports were about 14,000 tons, but the maximum stable yield
is thought to be nearly 80,000 tons. A fish processing plant was built in 1998
that now exports 150 tons of frozen fish every month to markets in Britain,
Germany, and the Netherlands. Tensions with Yemen over fishing rights in the
Red Sea flared up in 1995 and again in 2002, and Eritrea's difficult relations
with other nations could hamper further development of the industry.

### Mining and minerals

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( May 2023)_  
---|---  
  
As of 2001, Eritrea's substantial mineral deposits were largely unexplored.
According to the Eritrean government, artisanal mining in 1998 collected 573.4
kilograms of gold, however the number of gold reserves was unknown.
International observers also have noted Eritrea's potential for quarrying
ornamental marble and granite. As of 2001, some 10 mining companies had
obtained licenses to prospect for different minerals in Eritrea. The
government of Eritrea reportedly was in the process of conducting a geological
survey for use by potential investors in the mining sector. The presence of
hundreds of thousands of land mines in Eritrea, particularly along the border
with Ethiopia, has presented a serious impediment to future development of the
mining sector.

In 2011, AngloGold Ashanti moved into Eritrea to explore the Arabian-Nubian
Shield for gold through a 50/50 joint venture set up in 2009 with Thani Dubai
Mining.

In 2011, the Australian Chalice mining company applied through a 60/40 joint
venture for a mining license for 18 years.

Also in 2011, Nevsun Resources completed construction of its Bisha gold mining
project. Estimated production was to be 350,000 ounces of gold per year until
the gold ore is exhausted, at which point the mine would produce copper and
zinc.

As of 2012, nine explorer companies operated in Eritrea from Canada (NGEx
Resources), Australia (Chalice Gold Mines, South Boulder Mines, Sunridge Gold
Corp), China (Sichuan Road and Bridge Group, Zhong Chang Mining Co, China
Africa Huakan Investment Co., Land Energy Group (China) Ltd, Beijing Donia
Resources Co.), the UK (London Africa Ltd, Andiamo Exploration Ltd.), the UAE
and Barbados.

### Industry and Manufacturing

During the period of federation, industrial capacity largely shifted to
Ethiopia, leaving the Eritrean industrial sector with outmoded capital
equipment. In 2003 industry accounted for 25.3 percent of gross domestic
product. Major products include processed food and dairy products, alcoholic
beverages, glass, leather goods, marble, textiles, and salt.

### Energy

Households consume more than 80 percent of total energy production.
Electricity production in 2001 was estimated at 220.5 million kilowatt-hours.
Consumption for that year was estimated at 205.1-kilowatt hours. An
88-megawatt electricity plant funded by Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Abu Dhabi
was completed just south of Massawa in 2003, its completion delayed nearly
three years by the war with Ethiopia. Annual consumption of petroleum in 2001
was estimated at 370,000 tons. Eritrea has no domestic petroleum production;
the Eritrean Petroleum Corporation conducts purchases through international
competitive tender. According to the U.S. Department of Commerce,
opportunities exist for both on- and offshore oil and natural gas exploration;
however, these prospects have yet to come to fruition. The use of Wind energy
and solar power have slightly increased, due to the growth of solar power
manufacturing companies in the country. The Eritrean government has expressed
interest in developing alternative energy sources, including geothermal,
solar, and wind power.

Harnet Avenue in Asmara

### Services

In 2011, services accounted for 55 percent of gross domestic product.
Financial services, the bulk of the services sector, are principally rendered
by the National Bank of Eritrea (the nation's central bank), the Commercial
Bank of Eritrea, the Housing and Commerce Bank of Eritrea, the Agricultural
and Industrial Bank of Eritrea, the Eritrean Investment and Development Bank,
and the National Insurance Corporation of Eritrea.

### Tourism

Eritrea's lack of access to funds, the presence of large numbers of land
mines, and the continued tensions that flare up between Eritrea and Ethiopia
have deterred the development of a tourist industry in Eritrea. According to
the World Tourism Organization, international tourism receipts in 2002 were
only US$73 million.

### Banking and Finance

According to the International Monetary Fund, commercial banks in Eritrea—all
government owned and operated—appear to be in compliance with prudent
regulations. Although the commercial banking sector is largely profitable,
mostly owing to income from foreign exchange transactions, the sector is
burdened by a high proportion of non-performing loans. Core lending activities
do not generate sufficient income to cover operating costs at most commercial
banks.

## Labor force

Agriculture employs about 80 percent of the population in Eritrea, and the
remaining 20 percent are employed in industry and services. The GDP per capita
at nominal value was $475 in 2011.

## Currency, exchange rate, and inflation

The official currency is the Eritrean nakfa (ERN), introduced in November
1997. In early 2005, likely in an effort to increase foreign capital reserves,
the Eritrean government decreed that all transactions in Eritrea must be
conducted in nakfa. It soon became illegal for individuals to hold and
exchange foreign currency. As of January 1, 2005, the government set the
foreign exchange rate at US$1=ERN15.

Inflation continues to be a problem in Eritrea, particularly as years of
drought push grain prices higher and defense expenditures remain high. The
International Monetary Fund estimates that in 2003 (the most recent year for
which figures are available) average inflation reached 23 percent.

The Massawa-Asmara Highway, built as part of the Wefri Warsay Yika'alo
program.

## Government budget

Eritrea does not publish a budget, making its fiscal condition difficult to
assess. According to the International Monetary Fund, the overall fiscal
deficit in 2003 was 17 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). Government
expenditures for that year were estimated to be US$375 million, with revenues
of only US$235.7 million. In 2002 the fiscal deficit was 32 percent of GDP.
Current expenditures continue to exceed budgeted spending, particularly in
defense and other discretionary expenditures. Monetary policy remains
subservient to the financing demands of the government, and debt is
unsustainably high. This situation is not likely to change until
demobilization of the military occurs. According to the CIA World Factbook,
the Eritrean Government has revenues of $715.2 million, and outlays of $1.021
billion.

## Foreign economic relations

China, India, South Korea, Italy, South Africa, and Germany are aggressively
pursuing market opportunities in Eritrea. There is growing interest in U.S.
products and services in Eritrea, although U.S. investment in Eritrea is still
small.

In 2011, Eritrea imported goods worth US$899.9 million, including machinery,
petroleum products, food, and manufactured goods. Eritrea's main suppliers
were Brazil, China, Egypt, India, Italy, Germany, Saudi Arabia, and South
Africa. In 2011 exports from Eritrea were valued at US$415.4 million, and the
bulk were food, livestock, small manufactures, sorghum, and textiles. The
major markets for Eritrean goods were China, Egypt, Italy, Saudi Arabia,
Sudan, and the UK. More recently, fish, flowers, and salt have joined the list
of exports.

Foreign investment is hindered by government regulations that seek to protect
domestic industries from foreign competition and by a generally unfavorable
investment climate. Major foreign investors in Eritrea include China, South
Korea, Italy, South Africa, and Germany, as well as the World Bank.

The government prefers private-sector investment to official aid programs and
declines foreign aid; therefore its relations with aid-dispensing nations and
international institutions have often been difficult.

On 16 September 2018, Eritrean President Isaias Afwerki and Ethiopian Prime
Minister Abiy Ahmed signed a peace agreement in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia between
the two countries after a bitter war that lasted 20 years (from 1998 to 2018).
The two neighbouring countries ceased hostilities and restored trade and
diplomatic ties, and planned joint projects.