Countries by GDP per capita (PPP) larger than Lithuania (2025)

The **economy of Lithuania** is the largest economy among the three Baltic
states. Lithuania is a member of the European Union and belongs to the group
of very high human development countries and is a member of the WTO and OECD.

In the 1990s, Lithuania rapidly moved from a centrally planned economy to a
market economy, implementing numerous liberal reforms. It enjoyed high growth
rates after joining the European Union along with the other Baltic states,
leading to the notion of a Baltic Tiger. Lithuania's economy (GDP) grew more
than 500 percent since regaining independence in 1990. The Baltic states have
a combined workforce of 3.3 million people, with 1.5 million of these working
people living in Lithuania.

The country is one of the fastest growing economies in the EU. GDP growth
reached its peak in 2008, and was approaching the same levels again in 2018.
Similar to the other Baltic States, the Lithuanian economy suffered a deep
recession in 2009, with GDP falling by almost 15%. After this severe
recession, the country's economy started to show signs of recovery already in
the 3rd quarter of 2009. It returned to growth in 2010, with a positive 1.3
outcome and with 6.6 per cent growth during the first half of 2011. GDP growth
had resumed in 2010, albeit at a slower pace than before the crisis. The
success of the crisis taming is attributed to the austerity policy of the
Lithuanian government.

Lithuania has a sound fiscal position. The 2017 budget resulted in a 0.5%
surplus, with the gross debt stabilising at around 40% of the GDP. The budget
remained positive in 2017, and was expected to continue to do so in 2018.

Foreign direct investment into Lithuania has been spiking every year since
2015, with significant increasements in 2020s, reaching its highest ever
recorded number in 2023. On average, around 80% of all foreign direct
investment in Lithuania comes from European Union countries. Sweden was
historically the largest investor with 20% – 30% of all FDI in Lithuania, but
it has been overtaken by Germany, the Netherlands and even Estonia in the
2010s. In 2017, Lithuania was the third country, after the Republic of Ireland
and Singapore by the average job value of investment projects. Lithuania is
ranked 11th in the world in the Ease of Doing Business Index prepared by the
World Bank Group, 16th out of 178 countries in the Index of Economic Freedom,
measured by The Heritage Foundation and 8th out of 165 countries in the
Economic Freedom of the World 2021 by Fraser Institute.

Based on OECD data, Lithuania is among the top 5 countries in the world by
postsecondary (tertiary) education attainment. This educated workforce
attracted investments, especially in the ICT sector during the past years. The
Lithuanian government and the Bank of Lithuania simplified procedures for
obtaining licences for the activities of e-money and payment institutions.
positioning the country as one of the most attractive for the financial
technology initiatives in the EU.

## History of economy

The history of Lithuania can be divided into seven major periods. All the
periods have some interesting and important facts that affected the economic
situation of the country in those times.

  * Ancient times – Baltic tribes (until the 13th century)
  * Kingdom of Lithuania (1251–1263)
  * Grand Duchy of Lithuania (1263–1569)
  * Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (1569–1795)
  * Pressure of the Russian Empire (1795–1914)
  * Republic of Lithuania during the interwar period (1918–1940)
  * Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic (1944–1990)
  * Republic of Lithuania (1990–)

### History up to the 20th century

The first Lithuanians formed a branch of an ancient ethno-linguistic group
known as the Balts. Up to the 4th century, Lithuanian tribes maintained close
trade contacts with the Roman Empire[_self-published source?_] via Aquileia
processing center and Carnuntum. Amber was the main good provided to the Roman
Empire from Baltic Sea coast, via a long route called the Amber Road.

Afterwards, the trading ties persisted with the central European tribes,
fostering a consistent exchange of goods. Alongside the most prized commodity
of amber, items such as leathers, furs, beeswax, and limited algicultural
productss were among the other traded commodities. The connections can be seen
through the shared name for amber - the Hungarian _gyanta, gyantar_ are
closely related to the Lithuanian _gintaras_. It's still debated which
language group could have loaned the word from another.

Consolidation of the Lithuanian lands began in the late 12th century. King
Mindaugas was the first Catholic King of Lithuania in 1253. The expansion of
the Grand Duchy of Lithuania reached its height in the middle of the 14th
century under the Grand Duke Gediminas (reigned 1316–1341), who established a
strong central government which later came to dominate the territories from
the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea. Grand Duke Gediminas issued letters to the
Hanseatic league, offering free access to his domains for men of every order
and profession from nobles and knights to tillers of the soil. Economic
immigrants and immigrants, seeking religious freedom improved the level of
handicrafts. During the reign of Duke Kęstutis (1297–1382), the first cash
taxes were introduced, although most taxes were still paid in goods (e.g.,
wheat, cattle, horses).

In 1569 the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth formed through the union of the
Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The economy of the
Commonwealth was dominated by feudal agriculture based on the exploitation of
the agricultural workforce (serfs). Poland–Lithuania played a significant role
in supplying 16th-century Western Europe with exports of three sorts of goods:
grain (rye), cattle (oxen) and fur. These three articles amounted to nearly
90% of the country's exports to western markets by overland and maritime
trade.[_citation needed_] There was even a Lithuanian trading vessel – vytinė,
used for four hundred years to transport grain via Nemunas river. Statutes of
Lithuania were the main collections of law statements and rules for nearly
three centuries since being published in 1529.

The Commonwealth was famous for Europe's first and the world's second modern
codified national constitution, the so-called Constitution of 3 May, declared
on 3 May 1791 (after the 1788 ratification of the United States Constitution).
Economic and commercial reforms, previously shunned as unimportant by the
Szlachta, were introduced, and the development of industries was encouraged.

Following the partitions of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1772, 1793
and 1795, the Russian Empire controlled the majority of Lithuania. During the
administration of the Lithuanian lands by the Russian Empire from 1772 to
1917, one of the most important events that affected economic relations was
the emancipation reform of 1861 in Russia. The reform amounted to the
liquidation of serf dependence previously suffered by peasants; it boosted the
development of capitalism. However, Lithuania, as did its neighbouring
provinces, remained an agricultural supplier for the post Industrial
Revolution European markets.

### Lithuania in the 20th century

Lithuania had stagnant economic growth in the interwar period (1919–1940). Its
GDP growth resembled newly established agricultureal states such as Estonia
and Poland. Lithuania's economy did not undergo contraction during the Great
Depression.

Construction of _Lietūkis_ agricultural cooperative's warehouse in Klaipėda.

On 16 February 1918, the Council of Lithuania passed a resolution for the re-
establishment of the Independent State of Lithuania. Soon, many economic
reforms for sustainable economic growth were implemented. A national currency,
called the Lithuanian litas, was introduced in 1922. It proved to become one
of the strongest and most stable currencies in Europe during the inter-war
period. Lithuania had a monometalism system where one litas was covered by
0.150462 grams of gold stored by the Bank of Lithuania in foreign countries.
Litas remained stable even in the period of Great Depression. During the time
of its independence, 1918–1940, Lithuania made substantial progress. For
example, Lithuania was the third-ranking flax producer and exporter in the
world market (export of flax constituted about 30 percent of all export
share), being surpassed only by Soviet Russia and Poland; Lithuanian farm
products such as meat, dairy products, many kinds of grain, potatoes, etc.
were of superior quality in the world market. Lithuanian farmers were joining
into cooperative companies – e.g. _Lietūkis_ , _Pienocentras_ , _Linas_ ,
which helped farmers to process and sell their products more efficiently and
profitably.

Having taken advantage of favorable international developments, and driven by
its foreign policy aims directed against Lithuanian statehood, the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) occupied Lithuania in 1940. Land and the
most important objects for the economy were nationalized, and most of the
farms collectivized. Just after one year of occupation, poverty level,
unemployment increased dramatically, lack of food products appeared. Later,
many inefficient factories and industry companies, highly dependent on other
regions of USSR, were established in Lithuania. Despite that, in 1990, GDP per
capita of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic was $8,591, which was above
the average for the rest of the Soviet Union of $6,871 but lagging behind
developed western countries.

The Soviet era brought Lithuania intensive industrialization and economic
integration into the USSR, although the level of technology and state concern
for environmental, health, and labor issues lagged far behind Western
standards. Urbanization increased from 39% in 1959 to 68% in 1989. From 1949
to 1952 the Soviets abolished private ownership in agriculture, establishing
collective and state farms. Production declined and did not reach pre-war
levels until the early 1960s. The intensification of agricultural production
through intense chemical use and mechanization eventually doubled production
but created additional ecological problems. This changed after independence,
when farm production dropped due to difficulties in restructuring the
agricultural sector.

The overall damage, resulted from the Soviet occupation (including the loss of
gross domestic product), estimated according to the UN recognised
methodologies amounted to approximately US$800 billion; direct damage
(including genocide and deportations of the citizens, property looting)
estimation is US$20 billion.

According to a 2019 study by economic historians, Lithuania had above average
economic growth from 1937 to 1973 (when compared to other economies), but
below average growth from 1973 to 1990.

### Development since the 1990s

Countries with larger GDP PPP per capita than Lithuania in 1995 vs 2022

Reforms since the mid-1990s led to an open and rapidly growing economy. Open
to global trade and investment, Lithuania now enjoys high degrees of business,
fiscal, and financial freedom. Lithuania is a member of the EU and the WTO, so
regulation is relatively transparent and efficient, with foreign and domestic
capital subject to the same rules. The financial sector is advanced,
regionally integrated, and subject to few intrusive regulations.

One of Lithuania's most important reforms was the privatization of state-owned
assets. The first stage of privatization was being implemented between 1991
and 1995. Citizens were given investment vouchers worth €3.1 billion in
nominal value, which let them participate in assets selling. By October 1995,
they were used as follows: 65% for acquisition of shares; 19% for residential
dwellings; 5% for agricultural properties; and 7% remained unused. More than
5,700 enterprises with €2.0 billion worth of state capital in book value were
sold using four initial privatization methods: share offerings; auctions; best
business plans competitions; and hard currency sales.

The second privatization step began in 1995 by approving a new law that
ensured greater diversity of privatization methods and that enabled
participation in the selling process without vouchers. Between 1996 and 1998,
526 entities were sold for more than €0.7 billion. Before the reforms, the
public sector totally dominated the economy, whereas the share of the private
sector in GDP increased to over 70% by the 2000 and 80% in 2011.

Monetary reform was undertaken in the early nineties to improve the stability
of the economy. Lithuania chose a currency board system controlled by the Bank
of Lithuania independent of any government institution. On 25 June 1993, the
Lithuanian litas was introduced as a freely convertible currency, but on 1
April 1994 it was pegged to the United States dollar at a rate of 4 to 1. The
mechanism of the currency board system enabled Lithuania to stabilize
inflation rates to single digits. The stable currency rate helped to establish
foreign economic relations, therefore leading[_citation needed_] to a constant
growth of foreign trade.

By 1998, the economy had survived the early years of uncertainty and several
setbacks, including a banking crisis. However, the collapse of the Russian
ruble in August 1998 shocked the economy into negative growth and forced the
reorientation of trade from Russia towards the West. In 1997, exports to the
Soviet Union's successor entity (the Commonwealth of Independent States) made
up 45% of total Lithuanian exports. This share of exports dropped to 21% of
the total in 2006, while exports to EU members increased to 63% of the total.
Exports to the United States made up 4.3% of all Lithuania's exports in 2006,
and imports from the United States comprised 2% of total imports. Foreign
direct investment (FDI) in 2005 was €0.8 billion.

Share of private sector in GDP

Lithuania was invited to the Helsinki EU summit in December 1999 to begin EU
accession talks in early 2000. On 2 February 2002 the litas was pegged to the
euro at a rate of 3.4528 to 1, which remained until Lithuania adopted the euro
in 2015. Lithuania was very close to introducing the euro in 2007, but the
inflation level exceeded the Maastricht requirements. On 1 January 2015,
Lithuania became the 19th country to use the euro.

The Vilnius Stock Exchange, now renamed the NASDAQ OMX Vilnius, started its
activity in 1993 and was the first stock exchange in the Baltic states. In
2003, the VSE was acquired by OMX. Since 27 February 2008 the Vilnius Stock
Exchange has been a member of NASDAQ OMX Group, which is the world's largest
exchange company across six continents, with over 3,800 listed companies. The
market cap of Vilnius Stock Exchange was €3.4 billion on 27 November 2009.

During the last decade (1998–2008) the structure of Lithuania's economy has
changed significantly. The biggest changes were recorded in the agricultural
sector as the share of total employment decreased from 19.2% in 1998 to just
7.9% in 2008. The service sector plays an increasingly important role. The
share of GDP in financial intermediation and real estate sectors was 17% in
2008 compared to 11% in 1998. The share of total employment in the financial
sector in 2008 has doubled compared with 1998.

### Lithuania in the 21st century

Real GDP growth in Lithuania, 1996–2019

Between 2000 and 2017, the Lithuanian GDP grew by 308%.

Europa Shopping Center in Vilnius with international brandmarks

One of the most important factors contributing to Lithuania's economic growth
was its accession to the WTO in 2001 and the EU in 2004, which allows free
movement of labour, capital, and trade among EU member states. On the other
hand, rapid growth caused some imbalances in inflation and balance of
payments. The current account deficit to GDP ratio in 2006–2008 was in the
double digits and reached its peak in the first quarter of 2008 at a
threatening 18.8%. This was mostly due to rapid loan portfolio growth as
Scandinavian banks provided cheap credit under quite lax rules in Lithuania.
The volume of loans to acquire lodgings has grown from 50 million LTL in 2004
up to 720 million LTL in 2007.[_citation needed_] Consumption was affected by
credit expansion as well. This led to high inflation of goods and services, as
well as trade deficit. A housing bubble was formed.

Economic sentiment indicator and its components

The global credit crunch which started in 2008 affected the real estate and
retail sectors. The construction sector shrank by 46.8% during the first
three-quarters of 2009 and the slump in retail trade was almost 30%. GDP
plunged by 15.7% in the first nine months of 2009.

Balance of payments in Lithuania, quarterly data

Lithuania was the last among the Baltic states to be hit by recession because
its GDP growth rate in 2008 was still positive, followed by a slump of more
than 15% in 2009. In the third quarter of 2009, compared to the previous
quarter, GDP again grew by 6.1% after five-quarters with negative numbers.
Austerity policy (four-fifths of the fiscal adjustment consisted of
expenditure cuts) introduced by the Kubilius government helped to balance the
current account from −15.5 in 2007 to 1.6 in 2009. Economic sentiment and
confidence of all business activities have rebounded from a record low at the
beginning of the year 2009.

Sectors related to domestic consumption and real estate still suffer from the
economic crisis, but exporters have started making profits even with lower
levels of revenue. The catalysts of growing profit margins are lower raw
material prices and staff expense.

At the end of 2017, investment of Lithuania's enterprises abroad amounted to
EUR 2.9 billion. The largest investment was made in Netherlands (24.1 per cent
of the total direct investment abroad), Cyprus (19.8 per cent), Latvia (14.9
per cent), Poland (10.5 per cent) and Estonia (10.3 per cent). Lithuania's
direct investment in the EU member states totalled EUR 2.6 billion, or 89.3
per cent of the total direct investment abroad.

Based on the Eurostat's data, in 2017, the value of Lithuanian exports
recorded the most rapid growth not only in the Baltic countries, but also
across Europe, which was 16.9 per cent. Lithuania performs well in few
measures of well-being in the Better Life Index by OECD, ranking above the
average in education and skills, and work-life balance. It is below the
average in income and wealth, jobs and earnings, housing, health status,
social connections, civic engagement, environmental quality, personal
security, and subjective well-being. Lithuanian people are the happiest people
in the Baltic States.

#### Euro adoption

Real GPD per capita development of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania

On 1 January 2015, Lithuania became the 19th country to adopt the euro.
Joining the euro would relieve the Bank of Lithuania of defending the value of
the litas, and "it would give Lithuania a say in the decision-making of the
European Central Bank (ECB), as well as access to the ECB single-resolution
fund and cheaper borrowing costs".

## Business climate

In 2024, Lithuania ranks 9th in the International Tax Competitiveness Index,
confirming its attractiveness for business. In the Index of Economic Freedom,
this European country ranks 15th, and 11th in the Ease of Doing Business
Index, underscoring its status as one of the most favorable jurisdictions for
entrepreneurship in Europe.

Cumulative foreign direct investment (FDI) in 2017 was EUR 14.7 billion, or 35
per cent of GDP, EUR 5215 per capita. The largest FDI flow in Lithuania was
into manufacturing (EUR 73.7 million), agriculture, forestry, fishery (EUR
27.4 million), information and communication (EUR 10 million). Sweden, The
Netherlands and Germany have remained the largest investors.

Lithuania seeks to become an innovation hub by 2020. To reach this goal, it is
putting its efforts into attracting FDI to added-value sectors, especially IT
services, software development, consulting, finance, and logistics. Well-known
international companies such as Microsoft, IBM, Transcom, Barclays, Siemens,
SEB, TeliaSonera, Paroc, Wix.com, Philip Morris, Thermo Fisher Scientific
established a presence in Lithuania.

Aerial view of the Kaunas Free Economic Zone

Lithuanian FEZs (Free economic zone) offer developed infrastructure, service
support, and tax incentives. A company set up in an FEZ is exempt from
corporate taxation for its first six years, as well as a tax on dividends and
real estate tax. 7 FEZ operate in Lithuania – Marijampolė Free Economic Zone,
Kaunas Free Economic Zone, Klaipėda Free Economic Zone, Panevėžys Free
Economic Zone, Akmenė Free Economic Zone, Šiauliai Free Economic Zone,
Kėdainiai Free Economic Zone. There are nine industrial sites in Lithuania,
which can also provide additional advantages by having a well-developed
infrastructure, offering consultancy service and tax incentives. Lithuania is
ranked third among developed economies by the quantity (16) of Special
Economic Zones – after USA (256) and Poland (21).

Lithuanian municipalities provide special incentives to investors who create
jobs or invest in infrastructure. Municipalities may tie designation criteria
to additional factors, such as the number of jobs created or environmental
benefits. Strategic investors' benefits could include favorable tax incentives
for up to ten years. Municipalities may grant special incentives to induce
investments in municipal infrastructure, manufacturing, and services.

About 40 percent of surveyed investors confirmed that they are carrying out
Research and experimental development (R&D) or plan to do it in their
Lithuanian branches. In 2018 Lithuania ranked as the second most attractive
location for manufacturers in the Manufacturing Risk Index 2018. In 2019,
Lithuania was 16th in _Top 20 European FDI destination countries_ list,
created by the Ernst & Young.

### Regional situation

Lithuania is divided into ten counties. There are four cities with a
population over 100,000 and two cities of over 50,000 people. The gross
regional product is concentrated in the two largest counties – Vilnius and
Kaunas. These two counties account for two-thirds of the GDP with just 50% of
the population.

In 2023-Q3 Vilnius County was the only one with the average salary above the
national average, while Utena County had the lowest with 20% below it.

In order to achieve balanced regional distribution of GDP, nine public
industrial parks (Akmene Industrial Park, Alytus Industrial Park, Kedainiai
Industrial Park, Marijampolė Industrial Park, Pagegiai Industrial Park,
Panevėžys Industrial Park, Radviliskis Industrial Park, Ramygala Industrial
Park and Šiauliai Industrial Park) and three private industrial parks (Tauragė
Private Industrial Park, Sitkunai Private Industrial Park, Ramučiai Private
Logistic and Industrial Park) were established to provide some tax incentives
and prepared physical infrastructure.

Lithuanian counties by GDP per capita, 2022 County  | Area  
(km2)  | Population (2024 January)  | GDP (billion EUR), 2023  | GDP per capita (EUR), 2023  | Av. monthly wage (2025 Q1)   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Gross (€)  | Net (€)   
Alytus County | 5,425  | 134,181  | 1.9  | 14,300  | 1,934  | 1,232   
Kaunas County | 8,089  | 585,430  | 14.7  | 25,200  | 2,320  | 1,427   
Klaipėda County | 5,209  | 339,831  | 7.6  | 22,500  | 2,179  | 1,356   
Marijampolė County | 4,463  | 134,663  | 2.0  | 14,800  | 1,735  | 1,118   
Panevėžys County | 7,881  | 209,093  | 3.8  | 18,200  | 1,897  | 1,213   
Šiauliai County | 8,540  | 266,803  | 4.8  | 18,000  | 1,955  | 1,242   
Tauragė County | 4,411  | 90,534  | 1.3  | 14,800  | 1,975  | 1,252   
Telšiai County | 4,350  | 130,913  | 2.3  | 17,700  | 2,050  | 1,291   
Utena County | 7,201  | 126,192  | 1.8  | 14,200  | 1,910  | 1,220   
Vilnius County | 9,731  | 868,251  | 33.6  | 39,100  | 2,592  | 1,578   
Lithuania  | 65,300  | 2,885,891  | 73.8  | 25,700  | 2,338  | 1,436   
  
## Sectors of economy

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in
Lithuania is Services with 53,386 companies followed by Unknown industry and
Wholesale Trade with 50,660 and 26,974 companies respectively.

### Services

One of the most important sub-sectors is information and communication
technologies (ICT). Around 37,000 employees work for more than 2,000 ICT
companies. ICT received 9.5% of total FDI. Lithuania hosts 13 of the 20
largest IT companies in the Baltic States. Lithuania exported EUR 128 million
worth ICT services in II quarter of 2018.

Development of shared services and business process outsourcing are some of
the most promising fields. Companies that have outsourced their business
operations to Lithuania include, Danske Bank, CITCO Group, Western Union,
Uber, MIRROR, PricewaterhouseCoopers, Anthill, Adform, Booking Holdings
(Kayak.com, Booking.com), HomeToGo, Visma, Unity, Yara International, Nasdaq
Nordic, Bentley Systems, Ernst & Young and many more.

#### Financial services

Lending and saving data

The financial sector concentrates mostly on the domestic market. There are
thirteen commercial banks that hold a license from the Bank of Lithuania and
eight foreign bank branches. Most of the banks belong to international
corporations, mainly Scandinavian. The financial sector has demonstrated
incredible growth in the pre-crisis period (1998–2008). Bank assets were only
€3.2 billion or 25.5% from GDP in 2000, half of which consisted of loan
portfolio.

By the beginning of the year 2009, bank assets grew to €26.0 billion or 80.8%
to GDP, the loan portfolio reached €20.7 billion. The loan-to-GDP ratio was
64%. The growth of deposits was not as fast as that of loans. At the end of
2008, the loan portfolio was almost twice as big as that of deposits. It
demonstrated high dependence on external financing. Contraction in the loan
portfolio has been recorded over the past year, so the loans to deposits ratio
are slowly getting back to healthy levels.

Moody's Corporation declared about opening its office in Vilnius.

##### Fintech

The country has increasingly sought to position itself as the EU's main
fintech hub, hoping to attract international firms by promising to provide
European operational licences within three months, compared to a waiting
period of up to a year in countries like Germany or the UK. In 2017 only, 35
fintech companies came to Lithuania – a result of Lithuanian government and
Bank of Lithuania simplified procedures for obtaining licences for the
activities of e-money and payment institutions. Europe's first international
Blockchain Centre launched in Vilnius in 2018. Since 2021, Lithuania has
issued hundreds of licenses for cryptocurrency exchange and storage services,
making it one of the leading countries in the EU for such permits. The
government of Lithuania also aims to attract financial institutions looking
for a new location after Brexit. Lithuania has granted a total of 39 e-money
licenses, second in the EU only to the UK with 128 licenses. In 2018, Google
set up a payment company in Lithuania, Vilnius was ranked a seventh fintech
city by foreign direct investment (FDI) performance in 2019.

Bank of Lithuania, the Central Bank of Lithuania established a Regulatory
sandbox to test financial innovations in a live environment under the guidance
and supervision of the Bank of Lithuania. Bank of Lithuania has also developed
LBChain which is the world's first blockchain-based sandbox developed by a
financial market regulator, combining technological and regulatory
infrastructures.

### Manufacturing

Linpra \- the largest association for engineering and manufacturing companies
in The Baltic States

Lithuania has a much larger manufacturing sector share in the economy's
structure than the other Baltic countries. In this regard, Lithuania is closer
to some Central European countries like the Czech Republic or Germany.

Manufacturing constitutes the biggest part of gross value added in Lithuania.
The food processing sector constitutes 11% of total exports. Dairy products,
especially cheese, are well known in neighbouring countries. Another important
manufacturing activity is chemical products. The manufacturing of machinery
and equipment sector in Lithuania comprises 7.1% of the country's GDP. 80% of
production is exported so chemical products constitute 12.5% of total exports.
Year 2019 was exemplary – more than 10 new factories were opened in Lithuania,
working in the fields in engineering, high precision instruments, furniture
and medical products.

Furniture

Furniture production employs more than 50,000 people and has seen double-digit
growth over the last three years. The biggest companies in this field work in
cooperation with IKEA, which owns one of the biggest wood processing companies
in Lithuania. Lithuania is the fourth biggest supplier of furniture for IKEA
after Poland, Italy and Germany.

Automotive industry

Continental AG in 2018 started to build a factory for high precision car
electronics – the biggest greenfield investment project in Lithuania so far.
Another German manufacturer of lighting technology Hella opened a plant in
2018 in Kaunas FEZ, which will produce sensors, actuators and control modules
for the automotive industry. Lithuania's automotive cluster experienced
significant growth during the past 5 years.

Companies in the automotive and engineering sector are relatively small but
offer flexible services for small and non-standard orders at competitive
prices. The sector employs about 3% of the working population and receives
5.6% of FDI. Vilnius Gediminas Technical University prepares experts for the
sector.

Biotechnology and life sciences

Lithuania's life science sector is growing around 20–25% annually; with
special focus on the production and research of biotechnology, pharmaceutical
and medical devices.

Laser technology

Lithuanian laser companies were among the first ones in the world to transfer
fundamental research into manufacturing. Lithuania's laser producers export
laser technologies and devices to nearly 100 countries. Half of all picosecond
lasers sold worldwide are produced by Lithuanian companies, while Lithuanian-
made femtosecond parametric light amplifiers, used in generating the
ultrashort laser pulses, account for as much as 80% of the world market.

### Tourism

Tourism in Lithuania is becoming increasingly important for the local economy,
constituting around 5.3% of GDP in 2016. Lithuania has 22,000 rivers and
rivulets, 3,000 lakes, a well-developed rural tourism network, a unique
coastal area of almost 100 km and four UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Lithuania
receives more than 1.4 million foreign tourists a year. Germany, Poland,
Russia, Latvia, and Belarus supply the most tourists, and a significant number
arrive from the UK, the USA, Finland, and Italy as well.

### Agriculture

Despite a decreased share in GDP, the agricultural sector is still important
for Lithuania as it employs almost 8% of the work force and supplies materials
for the food processing sector. In 2023 it, together with food produsts,
combined for 19.6% of all Lithuanian exports. 44.8% of the land is arable and
the total agricultural area was 2.9 million hectares, of which 2.3 million ha
were arable, in 2023. Three connecting municipalities - Panevėžys district,
Kupiškis and Raseiniai have the largest areas in the country. Cereals, wheat,
and triticale are the most popular production of farms. The number of
livestock and poultry has decreased twofold compared to the 1990s. The number
of cattle in Lithuania at the beginning of the year 2009 was 770,000, the
number of dairy cows was 395,000, and the number of poultry was 9.1 million.

Lithuanian food consumption has evolved; between 1992 and 2008, consumption of
vegetables increased by 30% to 86 kg per capita, and consumption of meat and
its products increased by 23% during the same period to 81 kg per capita. On
the other hand, consumption of milk and dairy products has decreased to 268 kg
per capita by 21%, and the consumption of bread and grain products decreased
to 114 kg per capita by 19% as well.

Lithuania produced in 2018:

  * 2.8 million tons of wheat;
  * 888 thousand tons of sugar beet (the beet is used to manufacture sugar and ethanol);
  * 619 thousand tons of barley;
  * 433 thousand tons of rapeseed;
  * 296 thousand tons of potato;
  * 213 thousand tons of pea;
  * 182 thousand tons of oat;
  * 153 thousand tons of triticale;
  * 149 thousand tons of bean;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like apple
(92 thousand tons), maize (87 thousand tons)and rye (44 thousand tons).

## Corporations

Lithuania traditionally has strong agricultural, furniture, logistics,
meatpacking & poultry, biotechnology and laser industries. Maxima is a retail
chain operating in Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Poland and Bulgaria and it is
the largest Lithuanian capital company and the largest employer in the Baltic
states. Girteka Logistics is Europe's largest transport company. Biotechpharma
[lt] is a biopharmaceutical research and development company with a focus on
recombinant protein technology development. The BIOK Laboratory is a startup
founded by biochemistry scientists which is the biggest producer of Lithuanian
natural cosmetic products. UAB SANITEX is the largest wholesale, distribution
and logistics company in Lithuania and Latvia, also active in Estonia and
Poland. SoliTek – the largest photovoltaic module and energy storage battery
manufacturer in Northern Europe. One of the leaders of cellular IoT gateways
producers in Europe – UAB Teltonika.

In the "Baltic Top 50", the biggest Baltic states companies rating created by
Coface, more than half – 27 – companies are from Lithuania. Together they
account for 69.1% combined turnover, 67.1% net profit, and 76.2% employees of
all the listed companies.

### Largest companies

The total revenue of the 1000 largest companies in Lithuania reached 77.9
billion euros in 2023, and seen a 2.6% year-to-year contraction. There were
the largest companies of Lithuania in 2023 financial year, by revenue:

Rank  
| Name | Headquarters | Revenue  
(bil. €) | Employees | Industry  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
01\.  | Orlen Lietuva, AB | Mažeikiai | 6.427  | 1,545 | Oil, petrol  
02\.  | Maxima LT, UAB | Vilnius | 2.143  | 11,704 | Retail  
03\.  | Ignitis, UAB | Vilnius | 1.381  | 404 | Electric power industry  
04\.  | Linas Agro [de; lt], AB | Panevėžys | 1.177  | 216 | Agribusiness  
06\.  | Viada LT, UAB | Vilnius | 0.897  | 1,197 | Petrol stations  
05\.  | Circle K Lietuva, UAB | Vilnius | 0.894  | 1.025   
07\.  | Iki Lietuva, UAB | Vilnius | 0.887  | 5,650 | Retail  
09\.  | Lidl Lietuva, UAB | Vilnius | 0.871  | 3,071   
08\.  | Thermo Fisher Scientific Baltics, UAB | Vilnius | 0.821  | 1,556 | Biotechnology, pharmaceutical  
010\.  | Sanitex [lt; de], UAB | Kaunas | 0.806  | 1,260 | Wholesale, logistics  
  
  1. **^** In the VŽ list

### Most valuable companies

Largest Lithuanian companies by valuation (EUR € billions) according to 15min
(2024).

Rank | Name | Headquarters | Valuation  
(bil. €) | Industry   
---|---|---|---|---  
01  | Maxima Group, UAB | Vilnius | 2.865  | Retail  
02  | Thermo Fisher Scientific Baltics, UAB | Vilnius | 2.404  | Life sciences  
03  | Avia Solutions Group, PLC | Vilnius | 2.394  | Aviation  
04  | Orlen Lietuva, AB | Mažeikiai | 2.196  | Oil, petrol  
05  | Luminor Bank, AS Lietuvos skyrius | Vilnius | 1.583  | Banking  
06  | Swedbank, AB | Vilnius | 1.441   
07  | Ignitis grupė, AB | Vilnius | 1.354  | Electric power  
08  | Baltic Classifieds Group, PLC | Vilnius | 1.284  | Web portal  
09  | SEB bankas, AB | Vilnius | 1.217  | Banking   
10  | Girteka Group, UAB | Vilnius | 1.097  | Logistics  
11  | Telia Lietuva, AB | Vilnius | 0.926  | Telecommunications  
12  | Tele2, UAB | Vilnius | 0.809   
13  | Lithuanian Railways, AB | Vilnius | 0.706  | Rail transport  
14  | Bitė Lietuva, UAB | Vilnius | 0.672  | Telecommunications   
  
## Workforce

Population with higher education, 2001–2008 Salaries and unemployment,
2001–2009

The number of the population aged 15 years and over is 1.45 million, activity
rate was 60 percent in 2017.

During the period of 1995–2017 average salary grew more than four times in
Lithuania. Despite this, labour costs in Lithuania are among the lowest in the
EU. Average monthly net salary in IV quarter 2018 was EUR 800 and increased by
9.5 percent. Unemployment in Lithuania has been volatile. Since the year 2001,
the unemployment rate has decreased from almost 20% to less than 4% in 2007
thanks to two main reasons. Firstly, during the time of rapid economic
expansion, numerous work places were established. This caused a decrease in
the unemployment rate and a rise in staff expenses. Secondly, emigration has
also reduced unemployment problems since accession to the EU. However, the
economic crisis of year 2008 has lowered the need for workers, so the
unemployment rate increased to 13.8% and then stabilized in the third quarter
of 2009. Unemployment rate in I quarter of 2018 was 6.3 percent.

Lithuania is among the top 5 countries in the world by postsecondary
(tertiary) education attainment.As of 2016[update], 54.9% of the population
aged 25 to 34, and 30.7% of the population aged 55 to 64 had completed
tertiary education. The share of tertiary-educated 25–64-year-olds in STEM
(Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) fields in Lithuania were
above the OECD average (29% and 26% respectively), similarly to business,
administration and law (25% and 23% respectively).

The level of labour productivity in Lithuania today is about one-third below
the OECD average. Lithuania is ranked 15th in Employment Flexibility Index.

### Largest employers by municipality

The following companies provided the most jobs (at least 1000 laborers) within
the specific municipalities in 2024. Employment agencies are excluded from the
list.

Municipality  | Company  | Industry  | No. Employees  | Perc. of workforce   
---|---|---|---|---  
Vilnius | Maxima LT | Retail | 4,576  | 040%   
Švenčionys | Intersurgical [de] | Health technology | 2,191  | 100%   
Panevėžys | PKC Group Lithuania [fi] | Automotive electronics | 2,094  |   
Klaipėda (district) | Vlantana [de] | Logistics | 1,909  | 079%   
Kaunas (district) | Hoptransa  | Logistics  | 1,670  | 094%   
Kaunas | Maxima LT  | Retail  | 1,634  | 014%   
Marijampolė | Mantinga  | Bakery | 1,603  | 100%   
Visaginas | Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant | Radioactive waste management | 1,599  | 100%   
Mažeikiai | Orlen Lietuva | Oil, petrol | 1,467  | 100%   
Vilnius (district) | Vilniaus paukštynas | Poultry farming | 1,296  | 100%   
Šiauliai | Trasis  | Logistics  | 1,239  | 078%   
Telšiai | Žemaitijos pienas | Dairy products | 1,239  | 100%   
Utena | Biovela-Utenos mėsa [lt] | Meat-packing | 1,196  | 100%   
Jonava | Achema | Fertilizers | 1,157  | 100%   
Kėdainiai | Krekenavos agrofirma  | Meat-packing  | 1,084  | 100%   
  
## Income and wealth distribution

Lithuania belongs to high income group according to Credit Suisse Global
Wealth Report 2019. As of 2019, Lithuanian average wealth per adult was
$50,254 (an increase of 82% from $27,507 in the year 2017) Household debt is
among the lowest among EU countries – 49 percent of net disposable income in
2015.

### Municipalities by median home value

Lithuanian municipalities by median home value (government estimate), 2021 Neringa Municipality has highest home prices in Lithuania surpassing capital city by almost two times Didžiasalis, Ignalina District. In 1989 it had population of 2,600 while in 2021 it was only around 1,000. | Municipality  | Median home value (government estimate), Eur   
---|---  
Neringa | 111,000  
Vilnius | 060,100  
Klaipėda | 047,400  
Palanga | 044,100  
Kaunas (district) | 043,900  
Kaunas | 040,700  
Klaipėda (district) | 039,800  
Šiauliai | 036,400  
Vilnius (district) | 035,100  
Druskininkai | 030,200  
Panevėžys | 029,200  
Birštonas | 025,500  
Trakai | 025,100  
Kretinga | 024,000  
Tauragė | 023,500  
Marijampolė | 023,300  
Alytus | 020,800  
Elektrėnai | 020,600  
Utena | 017,300  
Jonava | 017,000  
Mažeikiai | 015,000  
Plungė | 013,700  
Telšiai | 013,700  
Šiauliai (district) | 013,100  
Raseiniai | 012,600  
Jurbarkas | 012,500  
Šilutė | 011,900  
Širvintos | 011,800  
Ukmergė | 011,100  
Vilkaviškis | 010,700  
|  | Municipality  | Median home value (government estimate), Eur   
---|---  
Kazlų Rūda | 10,300  
Visaginas | 10,000  
Šakiai | 09,900  
Kėdainiai | 09,600  
Kalvarija | 08,800  
Kaišiadorys | 08,200  
Radviliškis | 07,900  
Rietavas | 07,800  
Joniškis | 07,800  
Šilalė | 07,600  
Skuodas | 07,400  
Švenčionys | 07,300  
Panevėžys (district) | 06,800  
Šalčininkai | 06,400  
Lazdijai | 06,400  
Prienai | 06,300  
Biržai | 06,200  
Alytus (district) | 06,200  
Molėtai | 06,200  
Pagėgiai | 06,000  
Akmenė | 05,700  
Kelmė | 05,700  
Pakruojis | 05,600  
Rokiškis | 05,300  
Varėna | 05,100  
Kupiškis | 05,000  
Anykščiai | 04,800  
Pasvalys | 04,700  
Zarasai | 04,200  
Ignalina | 03,700  
  
## Infrastructure

The transport, storage, and communication sector has increased its importance
to the economy of Lithuania. In 2008, it accounted for 12.1% of GDP compared
to 9.1% in 1996.

### Communications

Lithuania has a broadly developed radio, television, landline and mobile
phone, as well as broadband internet networks.

Lithuanian National Radio and Television, the public broadcaster in Lithuania
operates 3 television channels, including a satellite channel, as well as 3
radio stations. Privately owned commercial TV and Radio broadcasters operate a
multitude national, regional and local channels.

There are four TIER III datacenters in Lithuania. Lithuania is 44th globally
ranked country on data center density according to Cloudscene.

The fixed landline network connects 625 thousand households and businesses
(down from the record 845 thousand in 2005). The decline in subscription and
utilization of the landline network has been driven by increased availability
of mobile phone services. The mobile telephony penetration rate in Lithuania
(of 151 per 100 population in 2013) has been one of the highest in the world.
In 2013, there were 13 providers of mobile phone services, with the three
largest ones – BITĖ Lietuva, Omnitel, and Tele2 – operating their own cellular
networks.

Lithuanian retail internet sector is competitive, with more than 100 service
providers. Retail internet connectivity in Lithuania was among the cheapest in
Europe; however, the internet penetration rate (64% of households using
internet in 2013) was lower than in other EU countries in the region – Estonia
(79%), Latvia (70%) and Poland (69%). Lithuanian internet connection speeds
have been claimed to be among the fastest in the world based on user-initiated
tests at Speedtest.net.

### Energy

Heating energy data

The utilities sector accounts for more than 3% of gross value added in
Lithuania. Electricity production exceeded 12 billion kWh in 2007, and
consumption exceeded 9.6 billion kWh. Surplus electricity is exported.

Lithuania operated a nuclear power plant in Visaginas, which produced 72% of
electricity in Lithuania. The plant was shut down on 31 December 2009 in line
with the commitments made when Lithuania joined EU in 2004. A new nuclear
power plant in Visaginas has been proposed but the status of the project is
uncertain after it was rejected by the voters in a referendum in 2012.

The supply of heating energy was modernized during the decade (1998–2008).
Technological loss in the heat energy system has decreased significantly from
26.2% in the year 2000 to 16.7% in 2008. The amount of air pollution was
reduced by one-third. The share of renewable energy resources in the total
fuel balance for heat production increased to almost 20%.

In order to break down Gazprom's monopoly in the natural gas market of
Lithuania, the first large scale LNG import terminal (Klaipėda LNG FSRU) in
the Baltic region was built in the port of Klaipėda in 2014. The Klaipėda LNG
terminal was called _Independence_ , thus emphasising the aim to diversify the
energy market of Lithuania. Norvegian company Equinor supplies 540 million
cubic metres (19 billion cubic feet) of natural gas annually from 2015 until
2020. The terminal is able to cover 100% of Lithuania's demand and 90% of
Latvia's and Estonia's national demand in the future.

Kruonis Pumped Storage Plant operates as pumped-storage providing a spinning
reserve of the power system, in order to regulate the load curve of the power
system 24 hours a day. In 2015 Kruonis Industrial Park was established as a
place for data centers.

In 2018 synchronising the Baltic States' electricity grid with the Synchronous
grid of Continental Europe has started.

### Transport

Volume of goods transported, million tonne-kilometers Funding of roads

Lithuania forms part of the transport corridor between the East and the West.
The volume of goods transported by road transport has increased fivefold since
1996. The total length of roadways is more than 80,000 km, and 90% of them are
paved. The government spending on road infrastructure exceeded €0.5 billion in
2008. Via Baltica highway passes through Kaunas, while membership in the
Schengen Agreement allows for smooth border crossing to Poland and Latvia.

Rail transport in Lithuania provides long-distance passenger and cargo
services. Railways carry approximately 50 million tons of cargo and 7 million
passengers a year. Direct rail routes link Lithuania with Russia, Belarus,
Latvia, Poland, and Germany. Also, the main transit route between Russia and
Russia's Kaliningrad Region passes through Lithuania. _Lithuanian Railways_ AB
transports about 44% of the freight carried through Lithuania. This is a very
high indicator compared to other EU countries, where freight transportation by
rail amounts to only 10% of the total.

An ice-free seaport of Klaipeda is located in the western part of Lithuania.
The port is an important regional transport hub connecting the sea, land and
railway routes from east and west. It handles roughly 7,000 ships and 30
million tons of cargo every year, and accepts large-tonnage vessels (dry-cargo
vessels up to 70,000 DWT, tankers up to 100,000 DWT and cruise ships up to 270
meters long). The seaport of Klaipėda is able to receive _Panamax_ -type
vessels. One of the fastest growing segments of sea transport is passenger
traffic, which has increased fourfold since 2002. The inland river cargo port
in Marvelė, linking Kaunas and Klaipėda, received first cargo in 2019.

Lithuania has four international airports – Vilnius Airport (VNO), Kaunas
Airport (KUN), Šiauliai Airport (SQQ) and Palanga Airport (PLQ). More than 30
domestic airports being used by aeroclubs and amateur pilots.

### Storage

There are more than 600,000 m2 of modern logistics and warehousing facilities
in Lithuania. The biggest supply of new, modern warehousing facilities is in
the capital city Vilnius (after the completion of several new projects in the
third quarter of 2009, the supply of modern warehousing premises has increased
by nearly 12% in Vilnius and currently reaches 334,400 m2 of the rentable
area). Kaunas is in the second place (around 200,000 m2), and Klaipėda in the
third (122,500 m2). Since the beginning of the year 2009, prices for
warehousing premises have dropped by 20–25% in Vilnius, Kaunas, and Klaipėda,
and the current level of rents has reached the level of 2003. The costs for
renting new warehouses in Vilnius, Kaunas, and Klaipėda are similar and reach
0.75 to 1.42 EUR/m2, while the rents of old warehouses are 0.35 to 0.67
EUR/m2.

## International trade

Lithuanian economy is highly open and International trade is crucial. As a
result, the ratio of foreign trade to GDP for Lithuania has often exceeded
100%.

The EU is the biggest trade partner of Lithuania with a 67% of total imports
and 61.3% of total exports during 2015. The Commonwealth of Independent States
is the second economic union that Lithuania trades the most with, with a share
of imports of 25% and a share of exports of 23.9% during the same period. The
vast majority of commodities, including oil, gas, and metals have to be
imported, mainly from Russia, however in the recent years Lithuania's energy
dependence has shifted towards other countries such as Norway and the US.
Mineral products constitute 25% of imports and 18% of exports, mainly driven
by the presence of _ORLEN Lietuva_ oil refinery with a refining capacity of 9
million tons a year, owned by Polish concern PKN Orlen. _Orlen Lietuva_ sold
over €3.5 billion worth of products outside Lithuania, compared to the total
Lithuanian exports of €24 billion in 2014.

Some sectors are directed mainly at export markets. Transport and logistics
export two-thirds of their products and/or services; the biotechnology
industry exports 80%; plastics export 52%; laser technologies export 86%;
metal processing, machinery and electric equipment export 64%; furniture and
wood processing export 55%; textile and clothing export 76%; and the food
industry exports 36%.

**Foreign trade partners, January–December 2022**  
(structure of the statistics is highly affected by oil refinery _ORLEN Lietuva_ importing and exporting big amounts of oil products)  Rank  | Country  | Combined  
share  | Country  | Import  | Country  | Export  | Share of goods  
of Lithuanian origin  
in export  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
–  |  EU  | 62.7951%  |  EU  | 63.27%  |  EU  | 62.23%  | 65.72%   
1  |  Poland  | 10.46%  |  Poland  | 11.67%  |  Latvia  | 12.86%  | 41.86%   
2  |  Latvia  | 10.16%  |  Germany  | 11.62%  |  Poland  | 9.04%  | 61.42%   
3  |  Germany  | 9.93%  |  Latvia  | 7.87%  |  Germany  | 7.93%  | 75.47%   
4  |  United States  | 6.52%  |  United States  | 7.56%  |  Russia  | 6.16%  | 7.38%   
5  |  Russia  | 5.50%  |  Sweden  | 5.26%  |  Estonia  | 5.72%  | 52.23%   
6  |  Netherlands  | 4.93%  |  Russia  | 4.93%  |  Netherlands  | 5.44%  | 84.46%   
7  |  Sweden  | 4.73%  |  Norway  | 4.84%  |  United States  | 5.28%  | 91.10%   
8  |  Estonia  | 4.39%  |  Netherlands  | 4.50%  |  Sweden  | 4.11%  | 87.66%   
9  |  Norway  | 3.74%  |  Saudi Arabia  | 4.15%  |  United Kingdom  | 3.48%  | 86.66%   
10  |  United Kingdom  | 3.08%  |  China  | 3.78%  |  Belarus  | 3.27%  | 5.39%   
11  |  Italy  | 2.94%  |  Italy  | 3.66%  |  Ukraine  | 2.58%  | 70.47%   
12  |  France  | 2.45%  |  Estonia  | 3.26%  |  Norway  | 2.44%  | 84.71%   
13  |  Saudi Arabia  | 2.42%  |  United Kingdom  | 2.73%  |  France  | 2.29%  | 73.77%   
14  |  Belarus  | 2.29%  |  France  | 2.58%  |  Denmark  | 2.27%  | 84.41%   
15  |  China  | 2.15%  |  Finland  | 2.42%  |  Italy  | 2.08%  | 79.83%   
16  |  Finland  | 2.13%  |  Belgium  | 2.04%  |  Kazakhstan  | 1.96%  | 8.34%   
17  |  Belgium  | 1.80%  |  Czechia  | 1.83%  |  Finland  | 1.79%  | 71.15%   
18  |  Denmark  | 1.70%  |  Belarus  | 1.46%  |  Belgium  | 1.51%  | 80.10%   
19  |  Ukraine  | 1.69%  |  Spain  | 1.34%  |  Spain  | 1.44%  | 81.84%   
20  |  Czechia  | 1.52%  |  Denmark  | 1.23%  |  Turkey  | 1.42%  | 63.63%   
  
### Foreign corporate taxpayers

**Monthly average number of foreign corporate taxpayers, June–December 2024** Country  | Corporates  | Share   
---|---|---  
Germany  | 15,308  |  28.8%   
Poland  | 05,108  |  9.6%   
Italy  | 03,800  |  7.2%   
Netherlands  | 03,735  |  7.0%   
United Kingdom  | 03,255  |  6.1%   
France  | 02,688  |  5.1%   
Spain  | 02,292  |  4.3%   
Austria  | 01,614  |  3.0%   
Estonia  | 01,457  |  2.7%   
Latvia  | 01,448  |  2.7%   
Sweden  | 01,427  |  2.7%   
United States  | 01,132  |  2.1%   
Czechia  | 01,128  | 002.1%   
Belgium  | 00957  | 001.8%   
Denmark  | 00921  | 001.7%   
Total  | 53,218  | 100%   
  
## Natural resources

The total value of natural resources in Lithuania is around €17 billion, or
around one third of Lithuania's GDP. The most valuable natural resource in the
country is subterranean water, which constitutes more than half of the total
value of natural resources.

In 1990 Lithuania started petroleum production from onshore oil wells as a
response to the Soviet economic blockade. Since 2001 the yearly production
declined as Lithuanian government no longer supports development of new oil
wells and banned any development of offshore oil rigs.

## Macro-economic

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 2000–2020.

Year  | GDP (in bil. US$ PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in bil. US$ nominal) | GDP growth  
(real) | Inflation  
(in percent) | Unemployment rate  
(in percent) | Government debt  
(percentage of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
2000  | 33.7  | 9,618  | 11.5  | 3.8%  | 1.0%  | 16.4%  | 23%   
2005  | 54.6  | 16,422  | 26.1  | 7.7%  | 2.7%  | 8.3%  | 18%   
2006  | 60.4  | 18,472  | 30.2  | 7.4%  | 3.8%  | 5.8%  | 17%   
2007  | 68.9  | 21,319  | 39.8  | 11.1%  | 5.8%  | 4.2%  | 16%   
2008  | 72.1  | 22,539  | 48.0  | 2.6%  | 11.2%  | 5.8%  | 15%   
2009  | 61.9  | 19,562  | 37.5  | −14.8%  | 4.2%  | 13.8%  | 29%   
2010  | 63.7  | 20,552  | 37.2  | 1.6%  | 1.2%  | 17.8%  | 36%   
2011  | 68.9  | 22,752  | 43.6  | 6.0%  | 4.1%  | 15.4%  | 37%   
2012  | 72.9  | 24,382  | 43.0  | 3.8%  | 3.2%  | 13.4%  | 40%   
2013  | 76.7  | 25,904  | 46.5  | 3.5%  | 1.2%  | 11.8%  | 39%   
2014  | 80.8  | 27,537  | 48.6  | 3.5%  | 0.2%  | 10.7%  | 41%   
2015  | 83.3  | 28,671  | 41.4  | 2.0%  | −0.7%  | 9.1%  | 43%   
2016  | 86.3  | 30,097  | 43.0  | 2.3%  | 0.7%  | 7.9%  | 40%   
2017  | 91.2  | 32,298  | 47.7  | 3.8%  | 3.7%  | 7.1%  | 39%   
2018  | 101.1  | 36,239  | 53.8  | 3.6%  | 2.5%  | 6.1%  | 34%   
2019  | 107.4  | 38,587  | 54.8  | 3.9%  | 2.2%  | 6.3%  | 38%   
2020  | 106.9  | 38,605  | 56.9  | −1.8%  | 1.2%  | 8.2%  | 48%