Nutmeg is one of Grenada's key exports

The **economy of Grenada** is largely tourism-based, small, and open economy.
Between the 1980s and the 2000s, the main thrust of Grenada's economy has
shifted from agriculture to services, with tourism serving as the leading
foreign currency earning sector. The country's principal export crops are the
spices nutmeg and mace (Grenada is the world's second-largest producer of
nutmeg after Indonesia). Other crops for export include cocoa, citrus fruits,
bananas, cloves, and cinnamon. Manufacturing industries in Grenada operate
mostly on a small scale, including production of beverages and other
foodstuffs, textiles, and the assembly of electronic components for export.

Economic growth picked up in the late 1990s following slow growth and domestic
fiscal adjustment in the early years of the decade. Despite an expansionary
fiscal policy, the public debt remained moderate at around 50 percent of GDP
as deficits were financed partly by privatization receipts. Since 2001,
economic growth has declined. The decline was caused by adverse shocks, such
as a slowdown in the global economy and natural disasters. To deal with the
shocks, fiscal policy became more expansionary, while privatization receipts
declined. As a result, public debt increased sharply to near 110 percent of
GDP in 2003. Economic conditions worsened when Hurricane Ivan hit the country
in September 2004; progress in fiscal consolidation was impeded as government
revenues fell and policy priorities was shifted to post-hurricane relief.

Although reconstruction has proceeded quickly with significant aid from the
international community, tourism and agricultural activities remain weak and
nearly offset the stimulus from the reconstruction boom. The country is still
facing the difficult task of reconstruction and recovery, while public debt is
unsustainable and the government faces large financing gaps. In the years
ahead, reinvigorating growth will be a high priority, and continued efforts
are needed to address vulnerabilities.

## Overview

The economy of Grenada is small, and tourism is its largest foreign exchange
earner. Grenada shares a common central bank with Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States (OECS) and holds East Caribbean dollars as its currency.
After tourism, Grenada relies heavily on agricultural exports, mainly
different types of spices. Nutmeg, wheat flour, and various fruits make up the
majority of Grenada's exports (per 2017). Grenada has suffered many economic
drawbacks since becoming a nation. A major concern is the rising fiscal
deficit and heavy debt crippling its government operations. Hurricane Ivan in
2004 led to serious setbacks for Grenada, along with the Great Recession in
2008 as the United States of America is one of Grenada's largest trade
partners. Grenada was listed nine spaces above the bottom when it came to
total debt in 126 developing countries in 2017.

## Economic Performance

After experiencing GDP growth averaging nearly six percent a year in the late
1990s, economic growth declined considerably after 2001 as a result of a
decline in the tourism industry following the September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks, and damages caused by several hurricanes.

The economy of Grenada was brought to a near standstill in September 2004 by
Hurricane Ivan, which damaged or destroyed 90 percent of the country's
buildings, including some tourist facilities. In July 2005, Hurricane Emily
struck Grenada who was still recovering from the impact of Hurricane Ivan.
Besides the negative impacts to the tourism industry, the two devastating
hurricanes destroyed or significantly damaged a large percentage of Grenada's
tree crops, which may take years to recover.

As the damage of Hurricane Ivan to the economy exceeded 200 percent of GDP,
economic growth registered a negative growth of three percent in 2004,
compared with a positive growth rate of 5.8 percent in 2003. Although signs of
recovery have been seen in Grenada after the damage inflicted by Hurricanes
Ivan and Emily, economic conditions remain difficult; GDP is projected at a
growth rate of only one percent for 2005.

With the absence of sustained growth, the fiscal situation started to
deteriorate after 2001, reflecting a continued expansionary policy with a
sharp increase in spending on social sectors, the wage bill, and goods and
services. As a result, the fiscal deficit rose to 8.5 percent of GDP in 2001
from 3.2 percent in 2000. The fiscal situation remained shaky in 2002, with
the deficit widening to 19.2 percent of GDP due to dampened output from
Tropical Storm Lili. As the economy began to recover in 2003, the government
began to take steps for fiscal consolidation, and the fiscal deficit fell to
4.8 percent of GDP. Progress in fiscal consolidation was impeded in 2004 as
the government policy changed abruptly to post-hurricane relief. Meanwhile,
government revenues decreased as a result of the impact of the hurricanes on
the economy.

While economic growth has declined since 2001 due to adverse shocks, including
a slowdown in the global economy and natural disasters, fiscal policy became
more expansionary when privatization receipts declined. As a result, public
debt has increased sharply to over 100 percent of GDP since 2002; it remained
as high as near 130 percent of GDP in 2004.

Grenada is a member of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB), which
manages monetary policy and issues a common currency for all the member
countries. Inflation has remained low and stable within the framework of the
currency board arrangement, with inflation averaging at two percent over the
past 15 years.

## Balance of Payments

Grenada's current account balance has remained in large deficit due to its
heavy dependence on import of most consumer goods and domestic investment.
Following an average deficit of around 44 percent of GDP from 1997 to 2000,
the current account deficit has increased to over 35 percent of GDP since 2001
due to higher import demand combined with lower receipts from tourism and
nutmeg exports. The current account deficits are financed by inflows of
foreign direct investment, official grants and loans, and commercial borrowing
by the private sector. Grenada's economy is vulnerable to external shocks
considering its high dependence on tourism, exports, and imports of most of
the goods that are consumed or invested domestically. It is also prone to
other adverse shocks such as natural disasters.

## Regional Situation

In the aftermath of Hurricanes Ivan and Emily, the priority now for Grenada is
to continue the recovery process necessary to restore the infrastructure that
was devastated by the hurricanes. The international community has disbursed
significant amounts of aid, including financial help under the International
Monetary Fund's emergency assistance policy for natural disasters and
assistance from the World Bank and the Caribbean Development Bank.

In the context of regional economic development, further integration into the
Eastern Caribbean regional economy will help enhance Grenada's competitiveness
and increase its scale of economy in production, marketing and distribution.
The country also launched a citizenship by investment program in 2013.

## International Monetary Fund

The nation of Grenada joined the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on August
27, 1975. Since then, Grenada has been under heavy review with the IMF, who
have made Grenada eligible for special drawing rights. Special drawing rights
(abbreviated SDR) are supplementary foreign exchange reserve assets defined
and maintained by the IMF. Based on Grenada's performances, both economically
and policy wise, Grenada can be eligible for more SDRs. In the previous years,
Grenada and the IMF have been working closely to grow and sustain their
economy.

## Statistics

Grenada electricity production 1980-2019

  * **GDP:** purchasing power parity \- $1.401 billion (2015 est.)
  * **GDP -real growth rate:** 4.6% (2015 est.)
  * **GDP -per capita:** purchasing power parity - $13,100 (2015 est.)
  * **GDP - composition by sector:**
    * _Agriculture:_ 6.2%
    * _Industry:_ 14.3%
    * _Services:_ 79.5% (2015 est.)
  * **Population below poverty line:** 38% (2008 est.)
  * **Household income or consumption by percentage share:**
    * _lowest 10%:_ NA%
    * _highest 10%:_ NA%
  * **Inflation rate (consumer prices):** 1.3% (2015)
  * **Labor force:** 59,900 (2013)
  * **Labor force - by occupation:**
    * Services 69%
    * Agriculture 11%
    * Industry 20% (2008 est.)
  * **Unemployment rate:** 33.5% (2013)
  * **Budget:**
    * _Revenues:_ $191.8 million
    * _Expenditures:_ $230.9 million (2012 est)
  * **Industries:** food and beverages, textiles, light assembly operations, tourism, construction
  * **Industrial production growth rate:** -1% (2015 est.)
  * **Electricity - production:** 193 GWh (2012 est.)
  * **Electricity - production by source:**
    * _Fossil fuel:_ 98.2%
    * _Hydro:_ 0%
    * _Nuclear:_ 0%
    * _Other:_ 1.4% (2012 est.)
  * **Electricity - consumption:** 178 GWh (2012 est.)
  * **Electricity - exports:** 0 kWh (2013 est.)
  * **Electricity - imports:** 0 kWh (2013 est.)
  * **Agriculture - products:** bananas, cocoa, nutmeg, mace, citrus, avocados, root crops, sugarcane, maize, vegetables
  * **Exports:** $43.8 million (2015 est.)
  * **Exports - commodities:** nutmeg, bananas, cocoa, fruit and vegetables, clothing, mace
  * **Exports - partners:** Nigeria 44.7%, St. Lucia 10.8%, Antigua and Barbuda 7.3%, St. Kitts and Nevis 6.6%, Dominica 6.6%, United States 5.8% (2015)
  * **Imports:** $310.4 million (2015 est.)
  * **Imports - commodities:** food, manufactured goods, machinery, chemicals, fuel
  * **Imports - partners:** Trinidad and Tobago 49.6%, United States 16.4% (2015)
  * **Debt - external:** $679 million (2013 est.)
  * **Economic aid \- recipient:** $8.3 million (1995)
  * **Currency:** 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents
  * **Exchange rates:** East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1 – 2.7000 (fixed rate since 1976)
  * **Fiscal year:** calendar year