The **economy ofIraq** is dominated by the oil sector, which provided 89% of
foreign exchange earnings in 2024. During its modern history, the oil sector
has provided about 99.7% of foreign exchange earnings. Agrarian economy
underwent rapid development following the 14 July Revolution in 1958 which
overthrew the Hashemite monarchy. It had become the third-largest economy in
the Middle East by 1980. This occurred in part because of the
industrialization and infrastructure development initiatives led by Saddam
Hussein in the 1970s, which included irrigation projects, railway and highway
construction, and rural electrification.

In the 1980s, financial problems caused by massive expenditures in the Iran-
Iraq War and damage to oil export facilities by Iran's military led the
Ba'athist government to implement austerity measures, to borrow heavily, and
to later reschedule foreign debt payments. Iraq suffered economic losses of at
least $80 billion from the war. In 1988, the hostilities ended. Oil exports
gradually increased with the construction of new pipelines and restoration of
damaged facilities, but again underwent a sharp decline after the Persian Gulf
War. GDP dropped to one-fourth of the country's 1980 GDP and continued to
decline under postwar international sanctions, until receiving aid from the
U.N. Oil-for-Food Programme in 1997. Iraq experienced a modest growth by 2000,
when the government attempted to make improvements and reorganizations in the
economic system.

The Coalition Provisional Authority made efforts to modernize the economy
after the 2003 U.S.-led invasion, through privatization and reducing the
country's foreign debt. As a result Iraq's economy expanded rapidly during
this time, though growth was stunted by the insurgency, civil war, economic
mismanagement, and oil shortages caused by outdated technology. Since
mid-2009, oil export earnings have returned to levels seen before Operation
New Dawn. Government revenues rebounded, along with global oil prices. In
2011, Iraq increased oil exports above their then-current level of 1,900,000
bbl (300,000 m3) per day as a result of new contracts with international oil
companies. The export was thought likely to fall short of the 2,400,000
barrels (380,000 m3) per day forecasting in the budget. Iraq's contracts with
major oil companies had the potential to greatly expand oil revenues, but Iraq
needed to upgrade its oil processing, pipeline, and export infrastructure to
enable these deals to reach their potential.

An improved security environment and an initial wave of foreign investment
helped to spur economic activity, particularly in the energy, construction,
and retail sectors. Broader economic improvement, long-term fiscal health, and
sustained increases in the standard of living still depended on the government
passing major policy reforms and the continued development of Iraq's massive
oil reserves. Although foreign investors viewed Iraq with increasing interest
in 2010, most were still hampered by difficulties acquiring land for projects
and other regulatory impediments.

## Economic growth

Historical GDP per capita development

Nominal GDP grew by 213% in the 1960s, 1325% in the 1970s, 2% in the 1980s,
−47% in the 1990s, and 317% in 2000s.

Real GDP per capita (measured in $1990 ) increased significantly during the
1950s, 60s and 70s, which can be explained by both higher oil production
levels as well as oil prices, which famously peaked in the 1970s due to the
OPEC's oil embargo, causing the 1973 oil crisis. In the following two decades,
however, GDP per capita in Iraq dropped substantially because of multiple
wars, namely the 1980-88 war with Iran, the 1990-1991 Gulf War.

### Iran-Iraq War

Before the outbreak of the war with Iran in September 1980, the economic
outlook was positive. In 1979, oil production reached a level of 560,000 m³
(3.5 million barrels) per day, and oil revenues were 21 billion dollars in
1979 and $27 billion in 1980 due to record oil prices. Iraq had amassed an
estimated $35 billion in foreign exchange reserves. It was believed to have
one of the best education and health care systems in the Middle East, and
thousands of migrant workers from Egypt, Somalia, and the Indian subcontinent
were employed in construction projects. The Iran–Iraq War and the 1980s oil
glut depleted Iraq's foreign exchange reserves, devastated its economy and
left the country with a foreign debt of more than $40 billion. Oil exports
gradually increased as new pipelines were constructed and damaged facilities
were restored.

### Sanctions

Iraq's seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, subsequent international economic
sanctions on Iraq, and damage from military action by an international
coalition beginning in January 1991, drastically reduced economic activity.
The regime exacerbated shortages by supporting large military and internal
security forces and by allocating resources to key supporters of the Ba'ath
Party. The implementation of the UN's Oil for Food program in December 1996
helped improve economic conditions. For the first six six-month phases of the
program, Iraq was allowed to export increasing amounts of oil in exchange for
food, medicine, and other humanitarian goods. In December 1999, the UN
Security Council authorized Iraq to export as much oil as required to meet
humanitarian needs. Per capita, food imports increased substantially, while
medical supplies and health care services steadily improved, though per capita
economic production and living standards were still well below their prewar
level.

Iraq changed its oil reserve currency from the U.S. dollar to the euro in
2000. However, 28% of Iraq's export revenues under the program were deducted
to meet UN Compensation Fund and UN administrative expenses. The drop in GDP
in 2001 was largely the result of the global economic slowdown and lower oil
prices.

### After the invasion of Iraq in 2003

The removal of sanctions on 24 May 2003 and rising oil prices in the mid-to-
late 2000s led to a doubling in oil production from a low of 1.3 mbpd during
the turbulence of 2003 to a high of 2.6 mbpd in 2011. Furthermore, reduced
inflation and violence since 2007 have translated to real increases in living
standards for Iraqis.

One of the key economic challenges was Iraq's immense foreign debt, estimated
at $130 billion. Although some of this debt was derived from normal export
contracts that Iraq had failed to pay for, some was a result of military and
financial support during Iraq's war with Iran.

The Jubilee Iraq campaign argued that much of these debts were odious
(illegitimate). However, as the concept of odious debt is not accepted, trying
to deal with the debt on those terms would have embroiled Iraq in legal
disputes for years. Iraq decided to deal with its debt more pragmatically and
approached the Paris Club of official creditors.

In a December 2006 _Newsweek International_ article, a study by Global Insight
in London was reported to show "that Civil war or not, Iraq has an economy,
and—mother of all surprises—it's doing remarkably well. Real estate is
booming. Construction, retail and wholesale trade sectors are healthy, too,
according to [the report]. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce reports 34,000
registered companies in Iraq,[_when?_] up from 8,000 three years ago. Sales of
secondhand cars, televisions and mobile phones have all risen sharply.
Estimates vary, but one from Global Insight puts GDP growth at 17 per cent
last year and projects 13 per cent for 2006. The World Bank has it lower: at 4
per cent this year. But, given all the attention paid to deteriorating
security, the startling fact is that Iraq is growing at all."

## Industry

| This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Economy of Iraq" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·**
scholar **·** JSTOR _( November 2023)__(Learn how and when to remove this
message)_  
---|---  
| This section may **requirecleanup** to meet Wikipedia's quality standards.
The specific problem is: **”Industry” section seems out of place and
potentially irrelevant/redundant.** Please help improve this section if you
can. _( November 2023)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
Since 1974, after the Iraqi Government took direct control of Iraq’s largest
private oil production operations, Mosul Oil and Basra Oil, most of Iraq's
manufacturing activity has been closely connected to the oil
industry.[_citation needed_] The major industries in that category have been
petroleum refining and the manufacture of chemicals and fertilizers. Before
2003, diversification was hindered by limitations on privatization and the
effects of the international sanctions of the 1990s. Since 2003, security
problems have blocked efforts to establish new enterprises. The construction
industry is an exception; in 2000 cement was the only major industrial product
not based on hydrocarbons. The construction industry has profited from the
need to rebuild after Iraq's several wars. In the 1990s, the industry
benefited from government funding of extensive infrastructure and housing
projects and elaborate palace complexes.

## Primary sectors

### Agriculture

Agriculture contributes just 3.3% to the gross national product but employs a
fifth of the labor force.

Historically, 50 to 60 per cent of Iraq's arable land was under
cultivation.[_self-published source?_] Under the UN Oil for Food program, Iraq
imported large quantities of grains, meat, poultry, and dairy products. In
1981, the government abolished its collective farming program. During the Gulf
War, Iraqi agriculture was disrupted physically and suffered from economic
sanctions imposed by the United Nations. Imports were curtailed, petroleum
exports were cut off and agricultural production with potential military
application was halted. The Iraqi government responded by monopolizing grain
and oilseed marketing, imposing production quotas, and instituting a Public
Distribution System for basic foodstuffs. By mid-1991, the government supplied
a "basket" of foodstuffs that provided about one-third of the caloric daily
requirement and cost consumers about five percent of its market value. With
subsidies for agricultural inputs diminished, the government's prices failed
to cover their costs. Tax on agricultural production reached 20 to 35 percent
by the mid-1990s. In October 1991 the Baghdad regime withdrew personnel from
the northern region controlled by two Kurdish parties. Kurdistan Region was
described as "... a market economy essentially left alone by a fragile
governing structure, but heavily influenced by substantial international
humanitarian aid flows."

In December 1996, under an "Oil for Food Program" negotiated with the United
Nations, Iraq started exporting petroleum and used the proceeds to import
foodstuffs. Grain imports averaged $828 million from 1997 to 2001, an increase
of over 180 percent from the previous five-year period. Due to foreign
competition, Iraqi production declined (29 percent for wheat, 31 percent for
barley, and 52 percent for maize). Because the government had neglected the
production of forage crops, fruits, vegetables, and livestock other than
poultry, those sectors were less buffeted by international affairs.
Nevertheless, they were affected by severe drought, an outbreak of screwworm,
and an epizootic of foot-and-mouth disease As the Oil for Food Program
expanded to cover more agricultural inputs and machinery, the productivity of
Iraqi agriculture stabilized around 2002.

After the U.S. invasion in March 2003, many Iraqis became dependent on
government-subsidized food. The US-funded agricultural reconstruction program
thus focused on increased productivity under the aegis of Agricultural
Reconstruction and Development Iraq (ARDI). Another program was run by
Development Alternatives, Inc. (DAI) of Bethesda, Maryland. The restoration of
Iraq's irrigation systems was largely funded by Bechtel International.

ARDI conducted trials to improve farming practices and crop varieties of
winter cereals (wheat and barley), summer cereals (rice, maize, and sorghum),
potatoes, and tomatoes. Feed supplements and veterinary treatments were
introduced to increase ovulation, conception, and birth weights of livestock.
Surveys were conducted of poultry growers and apple farmers. Nurseries were
established for date palms and grapes. ARDI had projects promoting trade
associations and producers' co-ops and supported extension as an appropriate
governmental function. The contract eventually cost over $100 million and
lasted through December 2006. Under its Community Action Program, USAID also
funded an analysis of markets for sheep and wool. It awarded a contract to the
University of Hawaii to revitalize higher education in agriculture. It awarded
a contract for $120 million to the Louis Berger Group to promote Iraq's
private sector, including agriculture.

Starting in 2006, Provincial Reconstruction Teams were sent in to promote
goodwill and sap the insurgency. "PRTs" allowed military commanders to
identify local needs and, with few bureaucratic hurdles, to dispense up to
$500,000. Civilians from many agencies within the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, as well as USAID, served tours on PRTs. Some participants
criticized the absence of a national agricultural strategy, or clear direction
on the design of projects. Others complained that projects emphasized
"American-style, 21st-century agricultural technologies and methodologies..."
that were inappropriate for Iraq.

Agricultural production did not rebound from the reconstruction program.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), between 2002 and
2013, the production of wheat increased 11 percent and milled rice 8 percent,
but barley had decreased 13 percent and maize 40 percent. Scaled in
"international dollars" (2004-2006 base equaling 100) Iraq's per capita food
production was 135 in 2002, 96 in 2007, and 94 in 2012. The agricultural
sector shed workers. In those same years, production per worker was 117, 106,
and 130, respectively.

The international Oil-for-Food program (1997–2003) further reduced farm
production by supplying artificially priced foreign foodstuffs. Because of
favorable weather conditions, grain production was 22 percent higher than in
2002. Although growth continued in 2004, experts predicted that Iraq would be
an importer of agricultural products for the foreseeable future. Long-term
plans call for investment in agricultural machinery and materials and more
prolific crop varieties—improvements that did not reach Iraq's farmers under
the Hussein regime. In 2004, the main crops were wheat, barley, corn, rice,
vegetables, dates, and cotton, and the main livestock outputs were cattle and
sheep.

The Agricultural Cooperative Bank, capitalized at nearly 1 G$ - by 1984,
targets its low-interest, low-collateral loans to private farmers for
mechanization, poultry projects, and orchard development. Large modern cattle,
dairy, and poultry farms are under construction. Obstacles to agricultural
development include labor shortages, inadequate management and maintenance,
salinization, urban migration, and dislocations resulting from previous land
reform and collectivization programs.

In 2011, an agricultural adviser to the Iraqi government, Layth Mahdi,
summarized the forced United States agricultural reconstruction:

> Before 2003, Iraq had imported about 30 per cent of its food needs annually.
> The decline in agricultural production after this period, created the need
> for importing 90 per cent of the food at a cost estimated at more than $12
> billion annually. Due to the sudden shift in the agricultural policy from
> subsidized assistance to an immediate shift to a free market policy, the
> outcomes led to a decline in production. The observed outcome resulted in
> many farmers abandoning the land and agriculture. The impact on natural
> resources results in an exploited and degraded environment leaving the land
> destitute and the people impoverished, unemployed [and] experiencing a sense
> of losing their human dignity.

Importation of foreign workers and increased entry of women into traditionally
male labour roles have helped compensate for agricultural and industrial
labour shortages exacerbated by the war. A disastrous attempt to drain the
southern marshes and introduce irrigated farming to this region merely
destroyed a natural food producing area, while concentration of salts and
minerals in the soil due to the draining left the land unsuitable for
agriculture.

In the Mada'in Qada region east of Baghdad, hundreds of small farmers united
to form the Green Mada'in Association for Agricultural Development, an
agricultural cooperative that provides its members with drip irrigation and
greenhouses as well as access to credit.

In recent years, farmers have been confronted with reduced rainfall and high
temperatures. Particularly affected are small scale farmers who, unable to
withstand lower water levels, are forced to leave their lands in search of
different ways to fulfill their livelihoods.

### Forestry, fishing, and mining

Throughout the twentieth century, human exploration, shifting agriculture,
forest fires, and uncontrolled grazing denuded large areas of Iraq's natural
forests, which in 2005 were almost exclusively confined to the northeastern
highlands. Most of the trees found in that region are not suitable for
lumbering. In 2002, a total of 112,000 cubic meters of wood were harvested,
nearly half of which was used as fuel.[_citation needed_]

Despite its notable large rivers, Iraq's fishing industry has remained
relatively small and based largely on marine species in the Persian Gulf. In
2001, the approximate yield was 8,000 tons (compared to 18,000/t during the
period between 1981-1997) according to official government estimates.

Aside from hydrocarbons, Iraq's mining industry has been confined to
extraction of relatively small amounts of phosphates (at Akashat), salt, and
sulfur (near Mosul). Since a productive period in the 1970s, the mining
industry has been hampered by the Iran–Iraq War (1980–88), the sanctions of
the 1990s, and the economic collapse of 2003.

### Energy

A map of world oil reserves according to U.S. EIA, 2017

Iraq is one of the most oil-rich countries in the world. The country holding
the fifth largest proven crude oil reserves, totaling 147.22 billion barrels
at the end of 2017. Most of this oil—4 million barrels per day out of 4.3
million barrels produced daily—is exported, making Iraq the third-largest
exporter of oil. Despite its ongoing civil war, Iraq was able to increase oil
production during 2015 and 2016, with production dipping by 3.5 per cent in
2017 due to conflict with the Kurdistan Regional Government and OPEC
production limits. By world standards, production costs for Iraqi oil are
relatively low. However, four wars—the 1980–1988 Iraq-Iran War, 1991 Gulf War,
the 2003–2011 War in Iraq, and the civil war—and the 1991–2003 UN sanctions
have left the industry's infrastructure in poor condition.

Khawr Al Amaya Oil Platform in Basra Governorate Power plant and oil refinery
in Baghdad

In the 1970s, Iraq produced over 3.5 million barrels of oil per day.
Production began to fall during the Iran-Iraq War, before plummeting 85 per
cent after the 1991 invasion of Kuwait. UN sanctions prevented the export of
oil until 1996, and then allowed exports only in exchange for humanitarian aid
in the Oil-for-Food Programme. The 2003 lifting of sanctions enabled
production—and exports—to restart. Production has since recovered to pre-Gulf
War levels, and most of Iraq's oil infrastructure has been repaired, despite
persistent sabotage by the Islamic State (ISIL) and others. In 2004, Iraq had
eight oil refineries, the largest of which were at Baiji, Basra, and Daura.

Despite its oil wealth, sabotage and technical problems at refineries have
forced Iraq to import petroleum, other refined oil products, and electricity
from the neighbouring countries, especially Iran. In 2004, for example, Iraq
spent $60 million per month for imported gasoline. Sabotage In late 2004 and
early 2005, regular sabotage of plants and pipelines reduced export and
domestic distribution of oil, particularly to Baghdad. Nationwide fuel
shortages and power outages resulted. Persistent ISIL sabotage of pipelines,
power plants and power lines, and theft of oil and electricity have also
contributed to the July 2018 protests in southern Iraq.

In 2004, plans called for increased domestic utilization of natural gas to
replace oil and for use in the petrochemical industry. However, because most
of Iraq's gas output is associated with oil, output growth depends on
developments in the oil industry.

Half of Iraq's power plants were destroyed in the Persian Gulf War of 1991,
and full recovery never occurred. In mid-2004, Iraq had an estimated 5,000
megawatts of power-generating capacity, compared with 7,500 megawatts of
demand. At that time, the transmission system included 17,700 kilometers of
line. In 2004, plans called for construction of two new power plants and
restoration of existing plants and transmission lines to ease the blackouts
and economic hardship caused by this shortfall, but sabotage and looting kept
capacity below 6,000 megawatts. The ongoing civil war, sabotage of
transmission lines, and government corruption caused the electricity shortage
to worsen: by 2010 demand outstripped supply by 6000 megawatts.

Oil continues to dominate Iraq's economy. As of 2018[update], oil is
responsible for over 65 per cent of GDP and 90 per cent of total government
revenue. Petroleum constitutes 94% of Iraq's exports with a value of $59.73
billion in 2017. The central government hopes to diversify the economy away
from oil, and has had some success: non-oil GDP growth, which was below the
regional average from 2014 to 2016, pushed above the average in 2017. Despite
this, the percentage of government spending going to non-oil investment has
continued to decline since 2013 and now[_when?_] stands at only 34 per cent.

#### 2009 oil services contracts

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( August 2018)_  
---|---  
  
Between June 2009 and February 2010 the Ministry of Oil tendered for the award
of Service Contracts to develop Iraq's existing oil fields. The results of the
tender, which were broadcast live on Iraqi television, are as follows for all
major fields awarded but excluding the Kurdistan Region where Production
Sharing Contracts have been awarded that are currently being disputed by the
Baghdad government. All contracts are awaiting final ratification of the
awards by the Iraqi government. Company shares are subject to change as a
result of commercial negotiations between parties.

Field  | Company  | Home country  | Company type  | Share in field  | Production increase share  | Service fee per bbl  | Gross revenue at plateau - US bn p.a.  | References   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Majnoon | Shell | Netherlands  | Public  | 45%  | 0.7875  | 1.39  | 0.4  | BBC Archived 7 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine  
| Petronas | Malaysia  | State  | 30%  | 0.525  | 1.39  | 0.266  | Shell  
Halfaya | CNPC | China  | State  | 37.5%  | 0.525  | 1.39  | 0.102  | Upstream Archived 12 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine  
| Petronas | Malaysia  | State  | 18.75%  | 0.099  | 1.4  | 0.051  | Upstream Archived 26 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine  
| TotalEnergies | France  | Public  | 18.75%  | 0.099  | 1.39  | 0.051  |   
Rumaila | BP | UK  | Public  | 37.5%  | 0.7125  | 2  | 0.520  | Business Week  
| CNPC | China  | State  | 37.5%  | 0.7125  | 1.39  | 0.520  |   
Zubair | ENI | Italy  | Public  | 32.81%  | 0.328  | 2  | 0.240  | Business Week  
| Occidental | US  | Public  | 23.44%  | 0.2344  | 2  | 0.171  | Business Week[_dead link_]  
| KOGAS | Korea  | State  | 18.75%  | 0.1875  | 2  | 0.137  | Business Week Archived 7 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine  
West Qurna Field Phase 2  | Lukoil | Russia  | Public  | 75.00%  | 1.3500  | 1.15  | 0.567  | Business Week  
| Equinor | Norway  | State  | n/a  | n/a  | n/a  | n/a  | Equinor Archived 25 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine  
Badra | Gazprom | Russia  | State  | 30%  | 0.051  | 5.5  | 0.102  | Business Week  
| Petronas | Malaysia  | State  | 15%  | 0.0255  | 5.5  | 0.051  | Upstream Archived 7 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine  
| KOGAS | Korea  | State  | 23%  | 0.03825  | 5.5  | 0.077  | Upstream Archived 7 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine  
| TPAO | Turkey  | State  | 8%  | 0.01275  | 5.5  | 0.026  |   
West Qurna Field Phase 1  | Exxon | US  | Public  | 60%  | 1.2276  | 1.9  | 0.851  | Business Week[_dead link_]  
| Shell | United Kingdom / Netherlands  | Public  | 15%  | 0.3069  | 1.9  | 0.213  | Alfred Donovan's blog Archived 29 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine (royaldutchshellplc.com)   
  
_Notes:_

  1. _Field shares are as a % of the total. The Iraqi state retains a 25% share in all fields for which service contracts have been awarded._
  2. _Production increase share is the millions of bbls per day that will attract the service fee for the company._
  3. _Gross revenue at plateau is the total payment each company will receive upon reaching their declared target plateau production rate (in between 5 and 8 years, depending on the field), before deduction of any operating costs, in addition to recovery of all development costs as billions of US dollars per annum. The total gross revenue for all companies, after recovery of capital costs, is at plateau production of an additional 9.4 mb/d, 4.34 bn US per annum, at a $70 bbl oil price. The 2010 Iraq govt budget is $60 billion. $300 billion is approximately $10,000 per annum for each Iraqi citizen._

In summary the shares by region in the increased production are:

Region  | Production  
Share mb/d  | % of  
total  
---|---|---  
Iraq  | 1.462  | 25%   
Asia  | 1.9  | 20%   
UK  | 1.81  | 19%   
US  | 1.462  | 16%   
Russia  | 1.402  | 14%   
Europe (excl UK)  | 0.528  | 6%   
  
## Services

### Finance

Iraq's financial services have been the subject of post-Saddam reforms. The 17
private banks established during the 1990s were limited to domestic
transactions and attracted few private depositors. Those banks and two main
state banks were badly damaged by the international embargo of the 1990s. To
further privatize and expand the system, in 2003 the Coalition Provisional
Authority removed restrictions on international bank transactions and freed
the Central Bank of Iraq (CBI) from government control. In its first year of
independent operation, the CBI received credit for limiting Iraq's
inflation.[_citation needed_] In 2004, three foreign banks (HSBC, Standard
Chartered, National Bank of Kuwait) were the first to receive licenses to do
business in Iraq.

#### Banking

Modern-style banking in Iraq roots from the beginning of the 20th century.

Iraq's two state-owned banks are the largest banks in Iraq and have a shared
history. In 1988, Rafidain Bank was spun off from Rafidain Bank .

Banking group  | Established  | Number of  
Branches  | Total Assets  
(Iraqi Dinar billion)  | Share of  
total  
banking system  
assets  | Share of  
total  
banking system  
credit  | Share of  
total  
banking system  
deposits  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Rasheed Bank | 1988  | 162  |  |  |  |   
Rafidain Bank | 1941  | 147  |  |  |  |   
  
### Private security

Because of the danger posed by Iraq's ongoing insurgency, the security
industry has been a uniquely prosperous part of the services sector. Often run
by former US military personnel, in 2005 at least 26 companies offered
personal and institutional protection, surveillance, and other forms of
security.

### Retail

Inside a shopping mall in Najaf

In the early post-Hussein period, a freewheeling retail trade in all types of
commodities straddled the line between legitimate and illegitimate commerce,
taking advantage of the lack of income tax and import controls.

  * Baghdad Mall

  * Dream City Mall

  * Zayoona Mall

  * Babylon Mall

  * A mall in Basra

  * Basra Times Square

### Tourism

The Iraq tourism industry, which in peaceful times has profited from Iraq's
many places of cultural interest (earning US$14 million in 2001), has been
dormant since 2003. Despite conditions, in 2005 the Iraqi Tourism Board
maintained a staff of 2,500 and 14 regional offices. Between 2009 and 2010,
165 tourists from 16 countries entered Iraq to visit historic sites; as of
January 2011, a U.S. State Department grant provided $2 million to help
preserve Babylon, supporting the re-opening of one of the site's two museums.

### Telecommunications

From 2003 to 2008, mobile phone subscriptions had expanded over hundred-fold
to ten million nationwide, according to the Brookings Institution.

## Labor force

| This section needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to
reflect recent events or newly available information. _( May 2025)_  
---|---  
  
In 2002, Iraq's labour force was estimated at 6.8 million people.

In 1996, some 66.4 per cent of the labour force worked in services, 17.5 per
cent in industry, and 16.1 per cent in agriculture. 2004 estimates of Iraq's
unemployment ranged from 30 per cent to 60 per cent.

**Nationwide unemployment rate since May, 2003** Month  | Unemployment  
rate  
---|---  
2003-2005 May  | N/A   
2003-2006 June  | 50-60%   
2003-2007 July  | N/A   
2003-2008 August  | 50-60%   
2003-2009 September  | N/A   
2003-2010 October  | 40-50%   
2003-2011 November  | N/A   
2003-2012 December  | 45-55%   
January to May 2004  | 30-45%   
June to November 2004–06  | 30-40%   
2004-12 December  | 28-40%   
January to October 2005  | 27-40%   
November to December 2005  | 25-40%   
2006  | 25-40%   
2007  | 25-40%   
2008  | 25-40%   
2009  | 23-38%   
2010  | 15.2%   
2011  | 15.2%   
2012  | 15.3%   
2013  | 15.1%   
2014  | 15%   
2015  | 15.5%   
2016  | 16%   
  
The CPA has referred to a 25% unemployment rate, the Iraqi Ministry of
Planning mentioned a 30% unemployment rate, whereas the Iraqi Ministry of
Social Affairs claims it to be 48%. Other sources are claiming a 20%
unemployment rate and a probably 60% under-employment rate. The actual figure
is problematic because of high participation in black-market activities and
poor security conditions in many populous areas. In central Iraq, security
concerns discouraged the hiring of new workers and the resumption of regular
work schedules. At the same time, the return of Iraqis from other countries
increased the number of job seekers. In late 2004, most legitimate jobs were
in the government, the army, the oil industry, and security-related
enterprises. Under Saddam Hussein's reign, many of the highest-paid workers
were employed by the greatly overstaffed government, whose overthrow disrupted
the input of these people to the economy. In 2004, the U.S. Agency for
International Development committed US$1 billion for a worker-training
program. In early 2004, the minimum wage was US$72 per month.[_citation
needed_]

## External trade

Iraqi exports in 2006

Iraq is a founding member of OPEC. Petroleum constitutes 99,7% of Iraq's
exports with a value of $43,8 billion in 2016.

From the 1990s until 2003, the international trade embargo restricted Iraq's
export activity almost exclusively to oil. In 2003, oil accounted for about
US$7.4 billion of Iraq's total US$7.6 billion of export value, and statistics
for earlier years showed similar proportions. After the end of the trade
embargo in 2003 expanded the range of exports, oil continued to occupy the
dominant position: in 2004 Iraq's export income doubled (to US$16.5 billion),
but oil accounted for all but US$340 million (2 per cent) of the total. In
late 2004, sabotage significantly reduced oil output, and experts forecast
that output, hence exports, would be below capacity in 2005 as well. In 2004,
the chief export markets were the United States (which accounted for nearly
half), Italy, France, Jordan, Canada, and the Netherlands. In 2004, the value
of Iraq's imports was US$21.7 billion, incurring a trade deficit of about
US$5.2 billion. In 2003, the main sources of Iraq's imports were Turkey,
Jordan, Vietnam, the United States, Germany, and Britain. Because of Iraq's
inactive manufacturing sector, the range of imports was quite large, including
food, fuels, medicines, and manufactured goods. By 2010, exports rose to
US$50.8 billion and imports rose to US$45.2 billion. Chief 2009 export
partners were: U.S., India, Italy, South Korea, Taiwan, China, Netherlands,
and Japan. Chief 2009 import partners were: Turkey, Syria, U.S., China,
Jordan, Italy, and Germany.

In March 2022, Iran-Iraq trade reached a volume of 10 billion USD, as joint
ventures increased significantly but were still limited due to sanctions
against Iran. Especially goods originating from Iran were subject to a trade
embargo imposed by the United States and the European Union. Iran and Iraq
signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on economic cooperation in January
2021.