The economy of Croatia is a developed mixed economy. It is one of the largest
economies in Southeast Europe by nominal gross domestic product (GDP). It is
an open economy with accommodative foreign policy, highly dependent on
international trade in Europe. Within Croatia, economic development varies
among its counties, with strongest growth in Central Croatia and its financial
centre, Zagreb. It has a very high level of human development, low levels of
income inequality, and a high quality of life. Croatia's labor market has been
perennially inefficient, with inconsistent business standards as well as
ineffective corporate and income tax policy.

Croatia's economic history is closely linked to its historic nation-building
efforts. Its pre-industrial economy leveraged the country's geography and
natural resources to guide agricultural growth. The 1800s saw a shipbuilding
boom, railroading, and industrial production. During the 1900s, Croatia
entered into a planned economy (with socialism) in 1941 and a command economy
(with communism) during World War II. It experienced rapid urbanization in the
1950s and decentralized in 1965, diversifying its economy before the collapse
of Yugoslavia during the 1990s. The Croatian War of Independence (1991–95)
curbed 21–25% of wartime GDP, leaving behind a developing transition economy.

The modern Croatian economy is considered high-income and dominated by its
tertiary service sector, which accounts for 70% of GDP. The high levels of
tourism in Croatia contributes to nearly 20% of GDP, with a total of 20.6
million tourists visiting in 2023. Croatia is an emerging energy power in
Southeast Europe, with strategic investments in liquefied natural gas (LNG),
geothermal networks, and electric transport. It supports regional economic
activity via transportation networks across the Adriatic Sea and throughout
Pan-European corridors. As a member of the European Union, Eurozone, and
Schengen Area, it uses the euro (€) as official currency. Croatia has free-
trade agreements with many world nations and is a part of the World Trade
Organization (2000) and the EEA (2013).

## History

### Pre-20th century

Zagreb Stock Exchange Palace in 1927 Oil refinery in Rijeka in the 1930s

When Croatia was still part of the Dual Monarchy, its economy was largely
agricultural. Modern industrial companies were also located in the vicinity of
the larger cities. The Kingdom of Croatia had a high ratio of population
working in agriculture. Many industrial branches developed in that time, like
forestry and wood industry (stave fabrication, the production of potash,
lumber mills, shipbuilding). The most profitable one was stave fabrication,
the boom of which started in the 1820s with the clearing of the oak forests
around Karlovac and Sisak and again in the 1850s with the marshy oak masses
along the Sava and Drava rivers. Shipbuilding in Croatia played a huge role in
the 1850s Austrian Empire, especially the long-range sailing boats. Sisak and
Vukovar were the centres of river-shipbuilding. Slavonia was also mostly an
agricultural land and it was known for its silk production. Agriculture and
the breeding of cattle were the most profitable occupations of the
inhabitants. It produced corn of all kinds, hemp, flax, tobacco, and great
quantities of liquorice.

The first steps towards industrialization began in the 1830s and in the
following decades the construction of big industrial enterprises took place.
During the 2nd half of the 19th and early 20th century there was an upsurge of
industry in Croatia, strengthened by the construction of railways and the
electric-power production. The industrial production was still lower than
agricultural production. Regional differences were high. Industrialization was
faster in inner Croatia than in other regions, while Dalmatia remained one of
the poorest provinces of Austria-Hungary. The slow rate of modernization and
rural overpopulation caused extensive emigration, particularly from Dalmatia.
According to estimates, roughly 400,000 Croats emigrated from Austria-Hungary
between 1880 and 1914. In 1910 8.5% of the population of Croatia-Slavonia
lived in urban settlements.

In 1918 Croatia became part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, which was in the
interwar period one of the least developed countries in Europe. Most of its
industry was based in Slovenia and Croatia, but further industrial development
was modest and centered on textile mills, sawmills, brick yards and food-
processing plants. The economy was still traditionally based on agriculture
and raising of livestock, with peasants accounting for more than half of
Croatia's population.

In 1941 the Independent State of Croatia (NDH), a World War II puppet state of
Germany and Italy, was established in parts of Axis-occupied Yugoslavia. The
economic system of NDH was based on the concept of "Croatian socialism". The
main characteristic of the new system was the concept of a planned economy
with high levels of state involvement in economic life. The fulfillment of
basic economic interests was primarily ensured with measures of repression.
All large companies were placed under state control and the property of the
regime's national enemies was nationalized. Its currency was the NDH kuna. The
Croatian State Bank was the central bank, responsible for issuing currency. As
the war progressed the government kept printing more money and its amount in
circulation was rapidly increasing, resulting in high inflation rates.

After World War II, the new Communist Party of Yugoslavia converted to a
command economy on the Soviet model of rapid industrial development. In
accordance with the communist plan, mainly companies in the pharmaceutical
industry, the food industry and the consumer goods industry were founded in
Croatia. Metal and heavy industry was mainly promoted in Bosnia and Serbia. By
1948 almost all domestic and foreign-owned capital had been nationalized. The
industrialization plan relied on high taxation, fixed prices, war reparations,
Soviet credits, and export of food and raw materials. Forced collectivization
of agriculture was initiated in 1949. At that time 94% of agricultural land
was privately owned, and by 1950 96% was under the control of the social
sector. A rapid improvement of food production and the standard of living was
expected, but due to bad results the program was abandoned three years later.

Throughout the 1950s Croatia experienced rapid urbanization. Decentralization
came in 1965 and spurred growth of several sectors including a prosperous
tourist industry. SR Croatia was, after SR Slovenia, the second most developed
republic in Yugoslavia with a ~55% higher GDP per capita than the Yugoslav
average, generating 31.5% of Yugoslav GDP or $30.1Bn in 1990. Croatia and
Slovenia accounted for nearly half of the total Yugoslav GDP, and this was
reflected in the overall standard of living. In the mid-1960s, Yugoslavia
lifted emigration restrictions and the number of emigrants increased rapidly.
In 1971 224,722 workers from Croatia were employed abroad, mostly in West
Germany. Foreign remittances contributed $2 billion annually to the economy by
1990. Profits gained through Croatia's industry were used to develop poor
regions in other parts of former Yugoslavia, leading to Croatia contributing
much more to the federal Yugoslav economy than it gained in return. This,
coupled with austerity programs and hyperinflation in the 1980s, led to
discontent in both Croatia and Slovenia which eventually fuelled political
movements calling for independence.

A ship being built in Split, 2010 GDP of Croatia at constant 2010 prices from
1990 to 2017 Real GDP growth in Croatia 2005–2015 Unemployment rate from 1996
to 2019 according to Eurostat

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, with the collapse of socialism and the
beginning of economic transition, Croatia faced considerable economic problems
stemming from:

  * the legacy of longtime communist mismanagement of the economy;
  * damage during the internecine fighting to bridges, factories, power lines, buildings, and houses;
  * the large refugee and displaced population, both Croatian and Bosnian;
  * the disruption of trade agreements; and
  * inefficient privatization

At the time Croatia gained independence, its economy (and the whole
Yugoslavian economy) was in the middle of a recession. Privatization under the
new government had barely begun when war broke out in 1991. As a result of the
Croatian War of Independence, infrastructure sustained massive damage in the
period 1991–92, especially the revenue-rich tourism industry. The
privatization of sovereign assets and transformation from a planned economy to
a market economy was thus slow and unsteady, largely as a result of public
mistrust when many state-owned companies were sold to politically well-
connected at below-market prices. With the end of the war, Croatia's economy
recovered moderately, but corruption, cronyism, and a general lack of
transparency stymied economic reforms and foreign investment. The
privatization of large government-owned companies was practically halted
during the war and in the years immediately following the conclusion of peace.
In 2000, roughly 70% of Croatia's major companies were still state-owned,
including water, electricity, oil, transportation, telecommunications, and
tourism.

The early 1990s experienced high inflation. In 1991 the Croatian dinar was
introduced as a transitional currency, but inflation continued to accelerate.
The anti-inflationary stabilization steps in 1993 decreased retail price
inflation from a monthly rate of 38.7% to 1.4%, and by the end of the year,
Croatia experienced deflation. In 1994 Croatia introduced the kuna as its
currency. As a result of the macro-stabilization programs, the negative growth
of GDP during the early 1990s stopped and reversed into a positive trend.
Post-war reconstruction activity provided another impetus to growth. Consumer
spending and private sector investments, both of which were postponed during
the war, contributed to the growth in 1995–1997. Croatia began its
independence with a relatively low external debt because the debt of
Yugoslavia was not shared among its former republics at the beginning. In
March 1995 Croatia agreed with the Paris Club of creditor governments and took
28.5% of Yugoslavia's previously non-allocated debt over 14 years. In July
1996 an agreement was reached with the London Club of commercial creditors,
when Croatia took 29.5% of Yugoslavia's debt to commercial banks. In 1997
around 60 percent of Croatia's external debt was inherited from former
Yugoslavia.

At the beginning of 1998 value-added tax was introduced. The central
government budget was in surplus in that year, most of which was used to repay
foreign debt. Government debt to GDP had fallen from 27.30% to 26.20% at the
end of 1998. However, the consumer boom was disrupted in mid 1998, as a result
of the bank crisis when 14 banks went bankrupt. Unemployment increased and GDP
growth slowed down to 1.9%. The recession that began at the end of 1998
continued through most of 1999, and after a period of expansion GDP in 1999
had a negative growth of −0.9%. In 1999 the government tightened its fiscal
policy and revised the budget with a 7% cut in spending.

In 1999 the private sector share in GDP reached 60%, which was significantly
lower than in other former socialist countries. After several years of
successful macroeconomic stabilization policies, low inflation and a stable
currency, economists warned that the lack of fiscal changes and the expanding
role of the state in the economy caused the decline in the late 1990s and were
preventing sustainable economic growth.

### 21st century

The new government led by the president of SDP, Ivica Račan, carried out a
number of structural reforms after it won the parliamentary elections on 3
January 2000. The country emerged from the recession in the 4th quarter of
1999 and growth picked up in 2000. Due to overall increase in stability, the
economic rating of the country improved and interest rates dropped. Economic
growth in the 2000s was stimulated by a credit boom led by newly privatized
banks, capital investment, especially in road construction, a rebound in
tourism and credit-driven consumer spending. Inflation remained tame and the
currency, the kuna, stable. In 2000 Croatia generated 5,899 billion kunas in
total income from the shipbuilding sector, which employed 13,592 people. Total
exports in 2001 amounted to $4,659,286,000, of which 54.7% went to the
countries of the EU. Croatia's total imports were $9,043,699,000, 56% of which
originated from the EU.

Unemployment reached its peak in late 2002, but has since been steadily
declining. In 2003, the nation's economy would officially recover to the
amount of GDP it had in 1990. In late 2003 the new government led by HDZ took
over the office. Unemployment continued falling, powered by growing industrial
production and rising GDP, rather than only seasonal changes from tourism.
Unemployment reached an all-time low in 2008 when the annual average rate was
8.6%, GDP per capita peaked at $16,158, while public debt as percentage of GDP
decreased to 29%. Most economic indicators remained positive in this period
except for the external debt as Croatian firms focused more on empowering the
economy by taking loans from foreign resources. Between 2003 and 2007,
Croatia's private-sector share of GDP increased from 60% to 70%. The Croatian
National Bank took steps to curb further growth of indebtedness of local banks
with foreign banks. The dollar debt figure is adversely affected by the EUR-
USD ratio—over a third of the increase in debt since 2002 is due to currency
value changes.

Economic growth declined due to the 2008 financial crisis. Immediately after
the crisis it seemed that Croatia did not suffer serious consequences like
some other countries. However, in 2009, the crisis gained momentum and the
decline in GDP growth, at a slower pace, continued during 2010. In 2011 the
GDP stagnated as the growth rate was zero. Since the global crisis hit the
country, the unemployment rate has been steadily increasing, resulting in the
loss of more than 100,000 jobs. While unemployment was 9.6% in late 2007, in
January 2014 it peaked at 22.4%. In 2010 Gini coefficient was 0,32. In
September 2012, Fitch ratings agency unexpectedly improved Croatia's economic
outlook from negative to stable, reaffirming Croatia's current BBB rating. The
slow pace of privatization of state-owned businesses and an over-reliance on
tourism have also been a drag on the economy.

Croatia joined the European Union on 1 July 2013 as the 28th member state. The
Croatian economy is heavily interdependent on other principal economies of
Europe, and any negative trends in these larger EU economies also have a
negative impact on Croatia. Italy, Germany and Slovenia are Croatia's most
important trade partners. In spite of the rather slow post-recession recovery,
in terms of income per capita it is still ahead of some European Union member
states such as Bulgaria, and Romania. In terms of minimum monthly wage,
Croatia is ahead of 9 EU members (Greece, Malta, Estonia, Czech Republic,
Slovakia, Romania, Latvia, Hungary, and Bulgaria) at €970.

The annual average unemployment rate in 2014 was 17.3% and Croatia has the
third-highest unemployment rate in the European Union, after Greece (26.5%),
and Spain (24.%). Of particular concern is the heavily backlogged judiciary
system, combined with inefficient public administration, especially regarding
the issues of land ownership and corruption in the public sector. Unemployment
is regionally uneven: it is very high in eastern and southern parts of the
country, nearing 20% in some areas, while relatively low in the north-west and
in larger cities, where it is between 3 and 7%. In 2015 external debt rose by
€2.7 billion since the end of 2014 and as of December 2022 is around €50.9
billion.

### 2016–2019

During 2015 the Croatian economy started with slow but upward economic growth,
which continued during 2016 and conclusive at the end of the year seasonally
adjusted was recorded at 3.5%. The better than expected figures during 2016
enabled the Croatian Government and with more tax receipts enabled the
repayment of debt as well as narrow the current account deficit during Q3 and
Q4 of 2016 This growth in economic output, coupled with the reduction of
government debt has made a positive impact on the financial markets with many
ratings agencies revising their outlook from negative to stable, which was the
first upgrade of Croatia's credit rating since 2007. Due to consecutive months
of economic growth and the demand for labour, plus the outflows of residents
to other European countries, Croatia had recorded the biggest fall in the
number of unemployed during the month of November 2016 from 16.1% to 12.7%.

### 2020

COVID-19 Pandemic has caused more than 400,000 workers to file for economic
aid of 4000.00 HRK./month. In the first quarter of 2020, Croatian GDP rose by
0.2% but then in Q2 Government of Croatia announced the biggest quarterly GDP
plunge of -15.1% since GDP has been measured. Economic activity also plunged
in Q3 2020 when GDP slid by an additional -10.0%.

In autumn 2020 European Commission estimated total GDP loss in 2020 to be
-9.6%. Growth was set to pick up in the last month of Q1 2021 and the second
quarter of 2021 respectively +1.4% and +3.0%, meaning that Croatia was set to
reach 2019 levels by 2022.

### 2021

In July 2021 projection was improved to 5.4% due to the strong outturn in the
first quarter and the positive high-frequency indicators concerning
consumption, construction, industry and tourism prospects. In November 2021
Croatia outperformed these projections and the real GDP growth was calculated
to be 8.1% for the year 2021, improving its projection of 5.4% GDP growth made
in July. The recovery was supported by strong private consumption, the better-
than-expected performance of tourism and the ongoing resilience of the export
sector. Preliminary data point to tourism-related expenditure already
exceeding 2019 levels, which has been supportive of both employment and
consumption. Exports of goods have also continued to perform strongly (up
43%yoy in 2Q21) pointing to resilient competitiveness. Croatian merchandise
exports in the first nine months of 2021 amounted to €13.3 billion, an annual
increase of 24.6%. At the same time, imports rose 20.3% to €20.4 billion. The
coverage of imports by exports for the first nine months is 65.4%. This made
2021 Croatian export's record year as the trade off-set from 2019 was exceeded
by €2 billion.

Exports recovered in all major markets, more precisely with all EU countries
and CEFTA countries. Specifically, on the EU market, only a lower export
result is recorded in relations with Sweden, Belgium and Luxembourg. Italy is
again the main market for Croatian products, followed by Germany and Slovenia.
Apart from the high contribution of crude oil that Ina sends to Hungary to the
Mol refinery for processing, the export of artificial fertilizers from
Petrokemija also has a significant contribution to growth.

For 2022, the Commission revised downwards its projection for Croatia's
economic growth to 5.6% from 5.9% previously predicted in July 2021.
Commission again confirmed that the volume of Croatia's GDP should reach its
2019 level during 2022, while in 2023 the GDP will grow by 3.4%. The
Commission warned that the key downside risks stem from Croatia's relatively
low vaccination rates, which could lead to stricter containment measures, and
continued delays of the earthquake-related reconstruction. Croatia's entry
into the Schengen area and euro adoption towards the end of the forecast
period could benefit investment and trade.

On Friday, 12 November 2021 Fitch raised Croatia's credit rating by one level,
from ‘BBB−‘ to ‘BBB’, Croatia's highest credit rating in history, with a
positive outlook, noting progress in preparations for Eurozone membership and
a strong recovery of the Croatian economy from the pandemic crisis. This is
also secured by the failure of the eurosceptic party Hrvatski Suverenisti in a
bid on the referendum to block Euro adoption in Croatia. In December 2021
Croatia's industrial production increased for the thirteenth consecutive
month, observing the growth of production increasing in all of the five
aggregates. meaning that industrial production in 2021 increased by 6.7
percent.

In 2021 Croatia joined the list of countries with its own automobile industry,
with Rimac Automobili's Nevera started being produced. The company also took
over Bugatti Automobiles in November same year and started building its new HQ
in Zagreb, titled as the "Rimac Campus", that will serve as the company's
international research and development (R&D) and production base for all
future Rimac products, as well as home of R&D for future Bugatti models. The
company also plans to build battery systems for different manufacturers from
the automotive industry This campus will also become the home of R&D for
future Bugatti models due to the new joint venture, though these vehicles will
be built at Bugatti's Molsheim plant in France.

### 2022

In late March 2022 Croatian Bureau of Statistics announced that Croatia's
industrial output rose by 4% in February, thus growing for 15 months in a row.
Croatia continued to have strong growth during 2022 fuelled by tourism revenue
and increased exports. According to a preliminary estimate, Croatia's GDP in
Q2 grew by 7.7% from the same period of 2021. The International Monetary Fund
(IMF) projected in early September 2022 that Croatia's economy will expand by
5.9% in 2022, whilst EBRD expects Croatian GDP growth to reach 6.5% by the end
of 2022. Pfizer announced launching a new production plant in Savski Marof
whilst Croatian IT industry grew 3.3% confirming the trend that started with
Coronavirus pandemic where the Croatia's digital economy increased by 16
percent on average annually from 2019 to 2021. It is estimated that by 2030
its value could reach 15 percent of GDP, with the ICT sector being the main
driver of that growth.

In 2022, Croatian economy is expected to grow between 5.9 and 7.8% in real
terms and it is expected to reach between $72 and $73.6 billion according to
preliminary estimates by Croatian Government surpassing early estimates of 491
billion kuna or $68.5 billion. Croatian Purchasing Power Parity in 2022 for
the first time should exceed $40 000, however considering Croatian economy
experienced 6 years of deep recession, catching up will take several more
years of high growth. Economic outlook for 2023 for Croatian economy are
mixed, depends largely on how the big Eurozone economies perform, Croatia's
largest trading partners; Italy, Germany, Austria, Slovenia and France are
expected to slow down, but avoid recession according to latest economic
projections and estimates, so Croatian economy as a result could see better
than expected results in 2023, early projections of between 1 and 2.6%
economic growth in 2023 with inflation at 7% is a significant slow down for
the country, however country is experiencing major internal and inward
investment cycle unparalleled in recent history. EU recovery funds in tune of
€8.7 billion coupled with large EU investments in recently earthquake affected
areas of Croatia, as well as major investments by local business in to
renewable energy sector, also EU supported and funded, as well as major
investments in transport infrastructure and rapidly expanding Croatia's ICT
sector, Croatian economy could see continuation of rapid growth in 2023.

On 12 July 2022, the Eurogroup approved Croatia becoming the 20th member of
the Eurozone, with the formal introduction of the Euro currency to take place
on 1 January 2023. Croatia joined the Schengen Area in 2023. By 2023, the
minimum wage is expected to rise to NET 700 EUR, increasing consumer spending.

## Sectors

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Croatia
is Services with 110,085 companies followed by Retail Trade and Construction
with 22,906 and 22,121 companies respectively.

### Industry

  * Uljanik shipyard

  * Asphalt plant in Ivanovec

  * Sisak oil refinery

  * Maraska liqueur factory in Zadar

### Tourism

  * Cruise ship in Dubrovnik.

  * Kopački Rit Nature park.

  * St. Mark's Church in Zagreb.

  * Varaždin Old Town.

  * Zlatni Rat beach on the island of Brač.

Tourism is a notable source of income during the summer and a major industry
in Croatia. In 2019, it dominates the Croatian service sector and accounts for
up to 11.8% of Croatian GDP. In 2023, 15.8 million international tourists
visited Croatia. Annual tourist industry income for 2011 was estimated at
€6.61 billion. Its positive effects are felt throughout the economy of Croatia
in terms of increased business volume observed in retail business, processing
industry orders and summer seasonal employment. The industry is considered an
export business, because it significantly reduces the country's external trade
imbalance. Since the conclusion of the Croatian War of Independence, the
tourist industry has grown rapidly, recording a fourfold rise in tourist
numbers, with more than 10 million tourists each year. The most numerous are
tourists from Germany, Slovenia, Austria and the Czech Republic as well as
Croatia itself. Length of a tourist stay in Croatia averages 4.9 days.

The bulk of the tourist industry is concentrated along the Adriatic Sea coast.
Opatija was the first holiday resort since the middle of the 19th century. By
the 1890s, it became one of the most significant European health resorts.
Later a large number of resorts sprang up along the coast and numerous
islands, offering services ranging from mass tourism to catering and various
niche markets, the most significant being nautical tourism, as there are
numerous marinas with more than 16 thousand berths, cultural tourism relying
on appeal of medieval coastal cities and numerous cultural events taking place
during the summer. Inland areas offer mountain resorts, agrotourism and spas.
Zagreb is also a significant tourist destination, rivalling major coastal
cities and resorts.

Croatia has unpolluted marine areas reflected through numerous nature reserves
and 99 Blue Flag beaches and 28 Blue Flag marinas. Croatia is ranked as the
18th most popular tourist destination in the world. About 15% of these
visitors (over one million per year) are involved with naturism, an industry
for which Croatia is world-famous. It was also the first European country to
develop commercial naturist resorts.

### Agriculture

  * Boškarin cattle.

  * Plantations in the fertile Neretva valley.

  * Vineyards of Istria.

  * Horse breeding

Croatian agricultural sector subsists from exports of blue water fish, which
in recent years experienced a tremendous surge in demand, mainly from Japan
and South Korea. Croatia is a notable producer of organic foods and much of it
is exported to the European Union. Croatian wines, olive oil and lavender are
particularly sought after. Value of Croatia's agriculture sector is around 3.1
billion according to preliminary data released by the national statistics
office.

Croatia has around 1.72 million hectares of agricultural land, however totally
utilized land for agricultural in 2020 was around 1.506 million hectares, of
these permanent pasture land constituted 536 000 hectares or some 35.5% of
total land available to agriculture. Croatia imports significant quantity of
fruits and olive oil, despite having large domestic production of the same. In
terms of livestock Croatian agriculture had some 15.2 million poultry, 453 000
Cattle, 802 000 Sheep, 1.157 000 Pork/Pigs,88 000 Goats. Croatia also produced
67 000 tons of blue fish, some 9000 of these are Tuna fish, which are farmed
and exported to Japan, South Korea and United States.

A comprehensive summary of Croatia's agricultural output in 2022:

  * 1.66 million tons of maize;
  * 970 thousand tons of wheat;
  * 524 thousand tons of sugar beet (the beet is used to manufacture sugar and ethanol);
  * 319 thousand tons of barley;
  * 196 thousand tons of soybean;
  * 154 thousand tons of sunflower seed;
  * 146 thousand tons of grape;
  * 107 thousand tons of potato;
  * 59 thousand tons of rapeseed;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like apple
(93 thousand tons), triticale (62 thousand tons) and olive (34 thousand tons).

### Transport

The country's longest motorway, A1, in 2010

The highlight of Croatia's recent infrastructure developments is its rapidly
developed motorway network, largely built in the late 1990s and especially in
the 2000s. By January 2022, Croatia had completed more than 1,300 kilometres
(810 miles) of motorways, connecting Zagreb to most other regions and
following various European routes and four Pan-European corridors. The busiest
motorways are the A1, connecting Zagreb to Split and the A3, passing east–west
through northwest Croatia and Slavonia. A widespread network of state roads in
Croatia acts as motorway feeder roads while connecting all major settlements
in the country. The high quality and safety levels of the Croatian motorway
network were tested and confirmed by several EuroTAP and EuroTest programs.

Croatia has an extensive rail network spanning 2,722 kilometres (1,691 miles),
including 985 kilometres (612 miles) of electrified railways and 254
kilometres (158 miles) of double track railways. The most significant railways
in Croatia are found within the Pan-European transport corridor Vb and
corridor X connecting Rijeka to Budapest and Ljubljana to Belgrade, both via
Zagreb. All rail services are operated by Croatian Railways.

There are international airports in Zagreb, Zadar, Split, Dubrovnik, Rijeka,
Osijek and Pula. As of January 2011, Croatia complies with International Civil
Aviation Organization aviation safety standards and the Federal Aviation
Administration upgraded it to Category 1 rating.

The busiest cargo seaport in Croatia is the Port of Rijeka and the busiest
passenger ports are Split and Zadar. In addition to those, a large number of
minor ports serve an extensive system of ferries connecting numerous islands
and coastal cities in addition to ferry lines to several cities in Italy. The
largest river port is Vukovar, located on the Danube, representing the
nation's outlet to the Pan-European corridor VII.

### Energy

An oil refinery near Rijeka, 2012 A hydroelectric power plant in Međimurje,
2014

There are 631 kilometres (392 miles) of crude oil pipelines in Croatia,
connecting the JANAF oil terminal with refineries in Rijeka and Sisak, as well
as several transhipment terminals. The system has a capacity of 20 million
tonnes per year. The natural gas transportation system comprises 2,544
kilometres (1,581 miles) of trunk and regional natural gas pipelines, and more
than 300 associated structures, connecting production rigs, the Okoli natural
gas storage facility, 27 end-users and 37 distribution systems.

Croatian production of energy sources covers 29% of nationwide natural gas
demand and 26% of oil demand. In 2023, net total electrical power production
in Croatia reached 16,378 GWh and Croatia imported 26% of its electric power
energy needs. The bulk of Croatian imports are supplied by the Krško Nuclear
Power Plant in Slovenia, 50% owned by Hrvatska elektroprivreda, providing 12%
of Croatia's electricity.

**Electricity:**

  * Production: 13,696 GWh (2022)
  * Consumption: 18,391 GWh (2022)
  * Exports: 7,225 GWh (2022)
  * Imports: 11,920 GWh (2022)

**Electricity:**

  * Hydro: 34% (2023)
  * Thermal: 21% (2023)
  * Nuclear: 12% (2023)
  * Renewable: 7% (2023)
  * Imports: 26% (2023)

**Crude Oil:**

  * Production: 594 thousand tons (2022)
  * Consumption: 2.306 million tons (2022)
  * Exports: 202 thousand tons (2022)
  * Imports: 1,979 million tons (2022)
  * Proved Reserves: 3,508,900 cubic metres (22,070,000 bbl) (2022)

**Natural Gas:**

  * Production: 745 million m3 (2022)
  * Consumption: 2,529 billion m3 (2022)
  * Exports: 1,063 million m3 (2022)
  * Imports: 3,022 billion m3 (2022)
  * Proved Reserves: 15.592,4 million m3 (2022)

## Banking

Croatian National Bank Building in Zagreb, 2014

### Central bank

The country's monetary policy is formulated and implemented by its national
bank, based in capital city, Zagreb.

  * Croatian National Bank

### Stock Exchange

  * Zagreb Stock Exchange

### Retail banks

  * Zagrebačka banka (owned by UniCredit from Italy)
  * Privredna banka Zagreb (owned by Intesa Sanpaolo from Italy)
  * Hrvatska poštanska banka
  * OTP Banka (owned by OTP Bank from Hungary)
  * Raiffeisen Bank Austria (owned by Raiffeisen from Austria)
  * Erste & Steiermärkische Bank (former Riječka banka, owned by Erste Bank from Austria)

## Central budget

General government gross debt of Croatia from 2000 to 2016

The central budget is set by the Government of Croatia to cover their upcoming
fiscal year, which runs from 1 January to 31 December. For 2024, they reported
€28.52 billion in revenue with €32.61 billion in expenditure, running a €4.09
billion budget deficit.

The breakdown of Croatia's budget for 2023, by ministry (department), is shown
below.

  * Labor and Pension System, Family and Social Policy – €10.59 billion
  * Finance – €7.15 billion
  * Health – €4.29 billion
  * Science and Education – €3.84 billion
  * Economy and Sustainable Development – €2.19 billion
  * Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure – €1.56 billion
  * Agriculture – €1.22 billion
  * Interior – €1.18 billion
  * Defence – €1.17 billion
  * Physical Planning, Construction and State Property – €0.74 billion
  * Justice and Public Administration – €0.68 billion
  * Culture and Media – €0.54 billion
  * Regional Development and EU funds – €0.42 billion
  * Tourism and Sport – €0.28 billion
  * Veterans' Affairs – €0.17 billion
  * Foreign and European Affairs – €0.15 billion

## Economic growth

The Croatian economy is expected to grow to $116 billion by 2029, as measured
by nominal gross domestic product (GDP). Since 1998, Croatia has been the
largest economy by nominal GDP of the former Yugoslav Republics according to
the IMF. It has been the second-largest economy of former Yugoslavia by
purchasing power parity (PPP) since 2008. Its high levels of coastal tourism
in Southeast Europe and deep integration within the European Union (EU) is a
major contributor to economic growth. From 2022 to 2025, Croatia has
maintained average GDP growth of 4.8%, outperforming the majority of fellow EU
member states. Economic growth in Croatia is dependent on high levels of
public investment and consumption, with key challanges being productivity,
labor market inefficiency, and limited private sector involvement.

## Data

The following table shows the main economic indicators for the period
2000–2024 according to the Croatian Bureau of Statistics. The purchasing power
parity (PPP) conversion factors are based on IMF estimates. Croatian
government debt values are published by the Croatian National Bank. Indicators
for 2024-2027 are provided by the IMF, specifically the World Economic Outlook
(April 2024).

Year  | Population (Mil.) | GDP (in Bil. EUR nominal) | GDP (Bil. USD nominal) | GDP per capita (nominal. EUR) | GDP per capita (nominal, USD) | GDP (Bil., USD PPP) | GDP per capita (PPP, USD) | Exchange Rate (USD/EUR) | PPP (National currency units/USD) | Inflation (%) | GDP growth (real %) | Government debt (% GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
2000  | 4.426  | 24.0  | 21.8  | 5,351  | 4,929  | 47.7  | 10,786  | 0.9236  | 0.503  | 4.6  | 2.9  | 35.4   
2001  | 4.300  | 25.8  | 23.3  | 6,044  | 5,414  | 50.1  | 11,655  | 0.8956  | 0.514  | 3.8  | 3.0  | 36.6   
2002  | 4.302  | 28.3  | 27.1  | 6,688  | 6,293  | 56.0  | 12,771  | 0.9456  | 0.505  | 1.7  | 5.7  | 36.5   
2003  | 4.303  | 31.2  | 35.0  | 7,206  | 8,130  | 58.9  | 13,682  | 1.1312  | 0.529  | 1.8  | 5.5  | 37.9   
2004  | 4.305  | 33.6  | 42.0  | 7,847  | 9,752  | 63.2  | 14,675  | 1.2439  | 0.532  | 2.1  | 4.1  | 40.0   
2005  | 4.310  | 36.2  | 45.8  | 8,539  | 10,620  | 66.7  | 15,439  | 1.2441  | 0.543  | 3.3  | 4.3  | 40.9   
2006  | 4.311  | 39.4  | 50.9  | 9,405  | 11,795  | 75.9  | 17,596  | 1.2556  | 0.520  | 3.2  | 4.9  | 38.5   
2007  | 4.310  | 43.2  | 60.6  | 10,272  | 14,043  | 84.2  | 19,491  | 1.3705  | 0.513  | 2.9  | 4.9  | 37.2   
2008  | 4.310  | 46.5  | 71.0  | 11,216  | 16,419  | 90.4  | 20,924  | 1.4708  | 0.514  | 6.1  | 1.9  | 39.1   
2009  | 4.305  | 44.4  | 63.4  | 10,549  | 14,663  | 87.1  | 20,147  | 1.3948  | 0.510  | 2.4  | -7.3  | 48.4   
2010  | 4.295  | 44.3  | 60.7  | 10,615  | 14,062  | 86.1  | 19,965  | 1.3257  | 0.514  | 1.1  | -1.3  | 57.3   
2011  | 4.281  | 45.0  | 63.4  | 10,608  | 14,758  | 90.3  | 21,013  | 1.3920  | 0.498  | 2.3  | -0.1  | 63.7   
2012  | 4.268  | 44.5  | 57.4  | 10,430  | 13,400  | 91.7  | 21,398  | 1.2848  | 0.486  | 3.4  | -2.3  | 69.4   
2013  | 4.256  | 44.7  | 59.0  | 10,423  | 13,869  | 94.3  | 22,135  | 1.3281  | 0.474  | 2.2  | -0.4  | 80.3   
2014  | 4.238  | 44.6  | 58.4  | 10,386  | 13,783  | 94.8  | 22,366  | 1.3285  | 0.470  | -0.2  | -0.4  | 83.9   
2015  | 4.204  | 45.7  | 50.7  | 10,755  | 11,944  | 98.1  | 23,339  | 1.1095  | 0.466  | -0.5  | 2.5  | 83.3   
2016  | 4.174  | 47.3  | 52.4  | 11,324  | 12,557  | 105.4  | 25,262  | 1.1069  | 0.449  | -1.1  | 3.6  | 79.8   
2017  | 4.125  | 49.5  | 55.9  | 12,101  | 13,657  | 112.3  | 27,201  | 1.1297  | 0.441  | 1.1  | 3.4  | 76.7   
2018  | 4.088  | 51.9  | 61.3  | 12,896  | 15,245  | 118.3  | 28,909  | 1.1810  | 0.439  | 1.5  | 2.8  | 73.3   
2019  | 4.065  | 54.8  | 61.3  | 13,678  | 15,333  | 130.4  | 30,585  | 1.1195  | 0.420  | 0.8  | 3.4  | 71.1   
2020  | 4.048  | 50.5  | 57.6  | 12,408  | 14,205  | 123.1  | 28,911  | 1.1422  | 0.410  | 0.1  | -8.6  | 87.3   
2021  | 3.879  | 58.2  | 68.8  | 15,006  | 17,747  | 143.0  | 34,533  | 1.1827  | 0.407  | 2.6  | 13.1  | 78.3   
2022  | 3.857  | 68.0  | 71.5  | 17,637  | 18,544  | 155.9  | 40,573  | 1.0530  | 0.418  | 10.8  | 6.3  | 70.4   
2023  | 3.856  | 78.0  | 84.4  | 20,239  | 21,878  | 186.7  | 48,586  | 1.0824  | 0.418  | 8.3  | 3.3  | 83.9   
2024  | 3.866  | 85.5  | 92.5  | 22,111  | 23,933  | 190.0  | 49,137  | 1.0824  | 0.45  | 3.0  | 3.8  | \-   
2025f  | 3.829  | 86.0  | 92.3  | 22,462  | 24,111  | 183.2  | 47,860  | 1.0734  | 0.469  | 2.2  | 2.7   
2026f  | 3.822  | 90.5  | 97.1  | 23,680  | 25,391  | 191.8  | 50,180  | 1.0722  | 0.472  | 2.2  | 2.7   
2027f  | 3.816  | 94.9  | 101.6  | 24,877  | 26,633  | 200.5  | 52,563  | 1.0705  | 0.473  | 2.2  | 2.6   
  
## GDP by county

Counties of Croatia by GDP, in million Euro  
---  
County  | 2000  | 2001  | 2002  | 2003  | 2004  | 2005  | 2006  | 2007  | 2008  | 2009  | 2010  | 2011  | 2012  | 2013  | 2014  | 2015  | 2016  | 2017  | 2018   
Bjelovar-Bilogora | 520  | 569  | 639  | 645  | 688  | 698  | 800  | 804  | 953  | 917  | 834  | 823  | 786  | 790  | 789  | 809  | 855  | 874  | 925   
Brod-Posavina | 564  | 628  | 687  | 713  | 779  | 771  | 849  | 918  | 1,032  | 952  | 914  | 917  | 895  | 888  | 853  | 879  | 917  | 969  | 1,016   
Dubrovnik-Neretva | 573  | 630  | 676  | 754  | 883  | 977  | 1,083  | 1,292  | 1,340  | 1,267  | 1,248  | 1,208  | 1,202  | 1,234  | 1,260  | 1,313  | 1,403  | 1,532  | 1,587   
Istria | 1,420  | 1,614  | 1,814  | 1,980  | 2,182  | 2,291  | 2,482  | 2,729  | 2,842  | 2,768  | 2,773  | 2,762  | 2,635  | 2,631  | 2,666  | 2,747  | 2,947  | 3,106  | 3,162   
Karlovac | 586  | 713  | 785  | 758  | 777  | 835  | 943  | 1,048  | 1,107  | 998  | 969  | 978  | 948  | 961  | 934  | 961  | 1,008  | 1,031  | 1,035   
Koprivnica-Križevci | 723  | 762  | 830  | 845  | 853  | 855  | 988  | 1,046  | 1,069  | 998  | 935  | 926  | 906  | 919  | 905  | 916  | 961  | 991  | 979   
Krapina-Zagorje | 569  | 655  | 681  | 706  | 729  | 815  | 858  | 947  | 974  | 868  | 807  | 815  | 803  | 823  | 837  | 867  | 928  | 990  | 1,021   
Lika-Senj | 235  | 250  | 309  | 384  | 522  | 407  | 429  | 417  | 491  | 445  | 416  | 405  | 382  | 388  | 379  | 388  | 402  | 427  | 436   
Međimurje | 510  | 562  | 644  | 654  | 691  | 737  | 841  | 892  | 1,034  | 977  | 933  | 941  | 929  | 1,088  | 959  | 986  | 1,045  | 1,109  | 1,142   
Osijek-Baranja | 1,352  | 1,459  | 1,668  | 1,700  | 1,872  | 2,043  | 2,249  | 2,600  | 2,834  | 2,642  | 2,507  | 2,514  | 2,421  | 2,438  | 2,375  | 2,436  | 2,544  | 2,581  | 2,572   
Požega-Slavonia | 325  | 355  | 380  | 420  | 451  | 464  | 478  | 508  | 554  | 504  | 497  | 482  | 458  | 461  | 433  | 440  | 453  | 466  | 499   
Primorje-Gorski Kotar | 2,111  | 2,138  | 2,261  | 2,543  | 2,685  | 3,066  | 3,371  | 3,560  | 4,060  | 3,820  | 3,822  | 3,905  | 3,981  | 3,849  | 3,849  | 3,854  | 3,961  | 4,177  | 4,270   
Sisak-Moslavina | 925  | 938  | 972  | 989  | 1,033  | 1,137  | 1,335  | 1,262  | 1,435  | 1,447  | 1,451  | 1,439  | 1,434  | 1,306  | 1,221  | 1,268  | 1,247  | 1,266  | 1,309   
Split-Dalmatia | 1,924  | 2,118  | 2,318  | 2,529  | 2,898  | 3,061  | 3,427  | 3,934  | 4,115  | 3,804  | 3,788  | 3,695  | 3,578  | 3,583  | 3,581  | 3,712  | 3,913  | 4,133  | 4,278   
Šibenik-Knin | 423  | 450  | 511  | 581  | 659  | 748  | 765  | 902  | 923  | 802  | 859  | 856  | 835  | 851  | 852  | 862  | 903  | 988  | 1,027   
Varaždin | 894  | 996  | 1,139  | 1,175  | 1,166  | 1,229  | 1,347  | 1,451  | 1,637  | 1,549  | 1,463  | 1,456  | 1,436  | 1,467  | 1,462  | 1,506  | 1,601  | 1,718  | 1,865   
Virovitica-Podravina | 357  | 406  | 438  | 458  | 471  | 476  | 555  | 590  | 615  | 546  | 516  | 526  | 504  | 496  | 455  | 460  | 485  | 500  | 536   
Vukovar-Syrmia | 624  | 686  | 762  | 816  | 864  | 928  | 1,079  | 1,109  | 1,260  | 1,171  | 1,090  | 1,092  | 1,049  | 1,048  | 999  | 1,031  | 1,076  | 1,120  | 1,171   
Zadar | 627  | 733  | 829  | 982  | 1,055  | 1,166  | 1,238  | 1,443  | 1,618  | 1,478  | 1,405  | 1,383  | 1,366  | 1,386  | 1,395  | 1,445  | 1,527  | 1,671  | 1,797   
Zagreb County | 1,284  | 1,272  | 1,583  | 1,653  | 1,823  | 2,059  | 2,128  | 2,419  | 2,653  | 2,555  | 2,398  | 2,449  | 2,439  | 2,450  | 2,466  | 2,549  | 2,651  | 2,832  | 3,011   
City of Zagreb | 6,912  | 7,806  | 8,569  | 9,458  | 10,400  | 11,717  | 12,954  | 14,059  | 15,439  | 14,561  | 15,586  | 15,383  | 15,055  | 14,778  | 14,754  | 15,206  | 15,818  | 16,782  | 17,544   
**Source** : Croatian Bureau of Statistics  
Counties of Croatia by GDP per capita, in Euro  
---  
County  | 2000  | 2001  | 2002  | 2003  | 2004  | 2005  | 2006  | 2007  | 2008  | 2009  | 2010  | 2011  | 2012  | 2013  | 2014  | 2015  | 2016  | 2017  | 2018   
Bjelovar-Bilogora | 4,007  | 4,383  | 4,951  | 5,042  | 5,417  | 5,539  | 6,395  | 6,489  | 7,756  | 7,522  | 6,907  | 6,888  | 6,657  | 6,766  | 6,829  | 7,107  | 7,647  | 7,958  | 7,986   
Brod-Posavina | 3,425  | 3,812  | 4,171  | 4,345  | 4,766  | 4,731  | 5,223  | 5,660  | 6,384  | 5,921  | 5,731  | 5,789  | 5,691  | 5,700  | 5,539  | 5,810  | 6,195  | 6,726  | 6,607   
Dubrovnik-Neretva | 4,886  | 5,373  | 5,738  | 6,378  | 7,442  | 8,197  | 9,025  | 10,698  | 11,024  | 10,351  | 10,174  | 9,855  | 9,812  | 10,083  | 10,297  | 10,737  | 11,500  | 12,608  | 13,277   
Istria | 7,184  | 8,160  | 9,117  | 9,880  | 10,813  | 11,267  | 12,116  | 13,221  | 13,691  | 13,285  | 13,297  | 13,270  | 12,684  | 12,665  | 12,811  | 13,199  | 14,165  | 14,915  | 15,570   
Karlovac | 4,181  | 5,082  | 5,635  | 5,491  | 5,666  | 6,139  | 6,989  | 7,830  | 8,341  | 7,598  | 7,458  | 7,615  | 7,461  | 7,651  | 7,541  | 7,868  | 8,373  | 8,701  | 8,301   
Koprivnica-Križevci | 5,955  | 6,269  | 6,858  | 7,025  | 7,134  | 7,181  | 8,335  | 8,878  | 9,108  | 8,545  | 8,052  | 8,020  | 7,890  | 8,039  | 7,969  | 8,149  | 8,660  | 9,066  | 8,711   
Krapina-Zagorje | 4,089  | 4,702  | 4,919  | 5,129  | 5,323  | 5,972  | 6,313  | 7,008  | 7,250  | 6,479  | 6,049  | 6,142  | 6,091  | 6,287  | 6,439  | 6,721  | 7,265  | 7,830  | 7,919   
Lika-Senj | 4,219  | 4,493  | 5,582  | 6,965  | 9,466  | 7,446  | 7,927  | 7,783  | 9,277  | 8,515  | 8,091  | 7,984  | 7,652  | 7,874  | 7,812  | 8,134  | 8,571  | 9,297  | 8,878   
Međimurje | 4,472  | 4,930  | 5,644  | 5,729  | 6,056  | 6,459  | 7,375  | 7,830  | 9,086  | 8,583  | 8,196  | 8,273  | 8,176  | 9,592  | 8,480  | 8,751  | 9,328  | 9,989  | 10,302   
Osijek-Baranja | 4,247  | 4,582  | 5,239  | 5,354  | 5,914  | 6,480  | 7,174  | 8,353  | 9,162  | 8,578  | 8,183  | 8,249  | 7,990  | 8,105  | 7,965  | 8,270  | 8,779  | 9,098  | 8,684   
Požega-Slavonia | 3,904  | 4,255  | 4,572  | 5,066  | 5,479  | 5,658  | 5,874  | 6,286  | 6,897  | 6,330  | 6,314  | 6,194  | 5,971  | 6,081  | 5,774  | 5,973  | 6,307  | 6,681  | 6,620   
Primorje-Gorski Kotar | 7,123  | 7,210  | 7,622  | 8,575  | 9,051  | 10,326  | 11,337  | 11,959  | 13,642  | 12,847  | 12,873  | 13,185  | 13,474  | 13,061  | 13,103  | 13,204  | 13,686  | 14,559  | 14,797   
Sisak-Moslavina | 4,884  | 4,952  | 5,158  | 5,285  | 5,552  | 6,156  | 7,292  | 6,966  | 8,018  | 8,184  | 8,321  | 8,372  | 8,465  | 7,832  | 7,459  | 7,899  | 7,939  | 8,284  | 7,868   
Split-Dalmatia | 4,422  | 4,866  | 5,278  | 5,723  | 6,508  | 6,820  | 7,593  | 8,684  | 9,059  | 8,361  | 8,323  | 8,121  | 7,866  | 7,876  | 7,876  | 8,184  | 8,655  | 9,183  | 9,636   
Šibenik-Knin | 3,855  | 4,094  | 4,631  | 5,254  | 5,946  | 6,733  | 6,863  | 8,081  | 8,262  | 7,202  | 7,788  | 7,855  | 7,764  | 7,998  | 8,086  | 8,267  | 8,776  | 9,737  | 9,713   
Varaždin | 4,952  | 5,516  | 6,327  | 6,550  | 6,525  | 6,890  | 7,564  | 8,165  | 9,233  | 8,758  | 8,298  | 8,281  | 8,193  | 8,412  | 8,434  | 8,752  | 9,389  | 10,176  | 10,899   
Virovitica-Podravina | 3,887  | 4,416  | 4,793  | 5,029  | 5,222  | 5,329  | 6,253  | 6,703  | 7,048  | 6,326  | 6,037  | 6,213  | 6,012  | 5,979  | 5,542  | 5,704  | 6,135  | 6,480  | 6,525   
Vukovar-Syrmia | 3,277  | 3,604  | 4,018  | 4,330  | 4,617  | 4,985  | 5,825  | 6,012  | 6,853  | 6,401  | 6,016  | 6,094  | 5,856  | 5,961  | 5,772  | 6,082  | 6,498  | 6,999  | 6,730   
Zadar | 4,050  | 4,726  | 5,289  | 6,193  | 6,579  | 7,186  | 7,534  | 8,676  | 9,640  | 8,752  | 8,281  | 8,114  | 7,985  | 8,084  | 8,146  | 8,478  | 9,003  | 9,901  | 10,803   
Zagreb County | 4,327  | 4,283  | 5,279  | 5,459  | 5,966  | 6,686  | 6,859  | 7,745  | 8,443  | 8,089  | 7,565  | 7,703  | 7,660  | 7,687  | 7,748  | 8,050  | 8,434  | 9,083  | 9,710   
City of Zagreb | 8,962  | 10,114  | 11,091  | 12,238  | 13,418  | 15,082  | 16,642  | 18,005  | 19,709  | 18,526  | 19,765  | 19,453  | 18,986  | 18,578  | 18,479  | 18,992  | 19,711  | 20,879  | 22,695   
**Source** : Croatian Bureau of Statistics