Overview of the economy of Kyrgyzstan

The **economy of Kyrgyzstan** is primarily driven by trade, light
manufacturing, mining, and agriculture. As a landlocked, lower-middle-income
country in Central Asia, Kyrgyzstan possesses abundant natural resources and
considerable potential in sectors such as hydroelectric power, agriculture,
and tourism.

Mining, particularly gold extraction, plays a pivotal role. The Kumtor mine
stands out as one of the largest gold deposits in the region. Beyond gold,
Kyrgyzstan is rich in critical raw materials essential for modern
technologies. Notably, the country holds significant antimony reserves, a
mineral vital for electronics and defense industries.

The services sector, particularly trade and transportation, has grown
steadily, driven by strengthening economic ties with China. After the 2022
sanctions on Russia, several regional supply routes were redirected through
Kyrgyzstan, boosting economic growth. Kyrgyzstan sustained strong annual GDP
growth of 9% in each of the years 2022, 2023, and 2024. These changes
highlight Kyrgyzstan’s strategic importance in Central Asia and its emerging
role in regional trade and infrastructure networks.

The government is embarking on several large infrastructure megaprojects,
notably the Kambarata-1 Hydropower Plant and the China–Kyrgyzstan–Uzbekistan
railway — an integral part of the Belt and Road Initiative — which have the
potential to significantly reshape the country’s economic landscape.

Kyrgyzstan’s long-term growth is supported by favorable demographics, with the
population increasing by 2% annually over the past decade to reach 7.3 million
in 2025. However, limited domestic employment opportunities continue to drive
labor migration, primarily to Russia. On a positive note, the economy’s
reliance on remittances — currently around 14.6% of GDP — has fallen sharply
from a peak of 35%.

## External trade

Kyrgyzstan’s trade landscape has evolved significantly in recent years, marked
by substantial growth in exports and a notable shift in trade partnerships. In
2024, Kyrgyzstan’s total exports reached $3.8 billion, representing a 13%
increase compared to 2023. The nation’s principal exports include gold, coal,
copper ores, clothing, electronics, and footwear. Gold remains the dominant
export commodity, with the Kumtor Gold Mine playing a pivotal role in
production.

Zhongda Oil Refinery in Kyrgyzstan

A significant development in Kyrgyzstan’s export profile is the surge in fuel
exports to Afghanistan. In 2024, Kyrgyzstan exported over 40 million liters of
refined petroleum to Afghanistan, a dramatic increase from the 384,000 liters
exported in 2022. Beyond fuel, Kyrgyzstan’s exports to Afghanistan encompass a
range of goods, including agricultural products (such as dried legumes and
flour), construction materials (like cement and metal structures), and
machinery and equipment. In 2024, total exports to Afghanistan amounted to $50
million, underscoring the growing economic ties between the two nations.

Kyrgyzstan’s key imports include refined petroleum, industrial machinery and
equipment, cars and automotive parts, chemical products, fabrics and textiles,
and a broad range of foodstuffs. In 2024, total imports reached $12.5 billion,
with a significant portion of these goods being re-exported.

Kyrgyzstan’s current account deficit in 2024 stood at 6% of GDP, a figure
adjusted to account for actual re-exports within the EAEU that are not
recorded in official export data.

### Transit trade of Kyrgyzstan

Kyrgyzstan’s membership in both the World Trade Organization (since 1998) and
the Eurasian Economic Union (since 2015) allows it to serve as a strategic
transit hub in Eurasian trade. The country operates as a **re-export
platform** , particularly for goods from China, Türkiye, South Korea and the
UAE, which are imported at low WTO tariffs and re-exported to other EAEU
countries — primarily Russia and Kazakhstan — without additional duties or
customs controls.

This arrangement creates a form of tariff arbitrage, as Kyrgyzstan’s lower
external tariff regime enables goods to enter the EAEU more cheaply than
through other member states. The significance of this role has increased since
2022, as Western sanctions on Russia prompted a surge in parallel imports
through Kyrgyz territory. This has generated robust economic growth and strong
fiscal outcomes. Given that Kyrgyzstan, like Russia, is part of the Eurasian
Economic Union (EAEU) customs free zone, trade statistics do not fully capture
its exports to other EAEU countries because there is no requirement for
conventional customs declarations for goods crossing the border. This
complicates the task of directly estimating re-exports through Kyrgyzstan.

From 2021-2024, the Kyrgyzstan's goods imports more than doubled, to $12.5
billion from $5.2 billion, almost entirely owing to imports of machinery and
transport equipment, including passenger cars. By country, China accounts for
almost 60% of this upswing, while European countries account for 8%. Most of
these additional imports have limited links with the Kyrgyz economy and are in
all likelihood re-exported to Russia, alongside other EAEU countries. The re-
export model supports a range of domestic sectors, including logistics,
warehousing, transportation, customs brokerage, and wholesale trade.

In August 2024, the Kyrgyz government established the _Trading Company of the
Kyrgyz Republic_ to monitor trade flows involving Kyrgyz companies whose goods
do not physically enter the country. This strategic move is part of
Kyrgyzstan’s broader efforts to regulate trade flows and financial
transactions, especially in the context of increased scrutiny over re-export
activities and compliance with international sanctions.

## Macroeconomic trend

Kyrgyzstan demonstrated strong macroeconomic performance between 2022 and
2024. The country maintained a fiscal surplus for two consecutive years, in
2023 and 2024, reflecting prudent public financial management and stronger-
than-expected revenue collection. Higher budget revenues were driven by taxes
and customs duties, which increased due to rising imports, higher gold prices,
and improved tax administration. Government expenditures rose to 34% of GDP in
2024 (up from 33% in 2023), fueled by increased spending on healthcare,
salaries, and pensions.

In the first quarter of 2025, Kyrgyzstan reported a significant fiscal surplus
of $528 million, driven by a 84% year-over-year increase in budget revenues.
The surplus is expected to contribute to reducing public debt and financing
infrastructure projects.

In recent years, Kyrgyz economy has been affected by inflationary pressures
stemming from global supply chain disruptions triggered by the Russia-Ukraine
war. Nevertheless, inflation remained relatively contained, supported by a
stable som and prudent monetary policy from the National Bank of the Kyrgyz
Republic. It declined from 10.8% in 2023 to 5% in 2024, before edging up to
6.9% by February 2025. The National Bank has maintained the policy rate at 9%
since May 2024.

Banking sector capital adequacy and liquidity ratios remained strong at 22.3%
and 78.8%, well above requirements.

The currency strengthened by 2.3% against the US dollar in 2024, while the
real effective exchange rate appreciated by 3.6%. Purchases of domestically
mined gold and the conversion of nonmonetary gold on the National Bank's
balance sheet to reserves increased gross reserves by a substantial 57.2% to
$5.1 billion at the end of 2024, cover for 4.2 months of projected imports, up
from 2.4 months in 2023.

## Public debt

Kyrgyzstan’s total public debt stood at $6.6 billion as of 31 December 2024,
representing 37.6% of GDP for the year, down from 42% in 2023. Total external
public debt amounted to $4.5 billion, or 25% of GDP, funded primarily by
official bilateral and multilateral creditors at concessional rates and with
long maturities. This significantly limits the potential for nonresident
capital flight in an adverse scenario, thereby mitigating external
vulnerabilities.

Kyrgyzstan's largest external creditors are Export–Import Bank of China ($1.65
billion or 36% of gross external debt), Asian Development Bank (16%), World
Bank (16%), the IMF (8%), the Eurasian Development Bank (6%). The average
weighted interest rate on external public debt was 1.57% per annum.

## Industries

### Agriculture

Irrigated fields in the Chuy Valley

Agriculture remains a vital part of Kyrgyzstan's economy and a refuge for
workers displaced from industry. Subsistence farming has increased in the
early 2000s. After sharp reductions in the early 1990s, by the early 2000s
agricultural production was approaching 1991 levels. Grain production in the
lower valleys and livestock grazing on upland pastures occupy the largest
share of the agricultural workforce. Farmers are shifting to grain and away
from cotton and tobacco. Other important products are dairy products, hay,
animal feed, potatoes, vegetables, and sugar beets.

Kyrgyzstan is now largely food self-sufficient, especially in dairy (110%),
vegetables (96%), potatoes (94%), and meat (80%). Grain production (especially
wheat and maize) is increasing to reduce import dependency, though ~12% of
wheat is still imported.

Kyrgyzstan's major agricultural crop production in 2024:

  * **Wheat** : 750,000 tons
  * **Barley** : 650,000 tons
  * **Maize (corn)** : 770,000 tons
  * **Rice** : 50,000 tons
  * **Potato** : 1,200,000 tons
  * **Sugar beet** : 870,000 tons
  * **Fruits and berries** : 426,000 tons
  * **Vegetables** : 1,500,000 tons

### Forestry

Only 4% of Kyrgyzstan is classified as forested. All of that area is state-
owned, and none is classified as available for wood supply. The main
commercial product of the forests is walnuts.

The Arslanbob walnut forest is the largest natural walnut forest in the world,
located in the Jalal-Abad Region of Kyrgyzstan, on the western slopes of the
Fergana and Chatkal mountain ranges. Covering approximately 11,000 hectares of
dense walnut groves, the broader forest zone, which includes other tree
species, extends over 600,000 to 700,000 hectares. Each mature tree can yield
150 to 400 kilograms of walnuts annually. Kyrgyzstan is a **major regional
exporter of walnuts** , with significant shipments to Russia, Iran, and
Turkey. In some years, up to 25% of Russia’s walnut imports come from
Kyrgyzstan.

### Fishing

Kyrgyzstan’s aquaculture industry has rebounded strongly since its collapse in
2003, growing from just 12 metric tons to over 20,000 tons by 2022. Total fish
production reached 33,600 tons in 2023, with exports exceeding 5,500 tons,
signaling expanding regional market opportunities. This growth is driven by
investments in technology, sustainable farming of cold-water species, and the
country’s rich freshwater resources. Kyrgyzstan is increasingly positioned as
a **key freshwater fish exporter in Central Asia** , enhancing both its
economy and food security.

### Mining and minerals

Mining continues to be a vital and growing sector in Kyrgyzstan’s economy. The
Kumtor Gold Mine, one of the largest gold deposits globally, has been a major
contributor since 1997. Promising new gold projects at Jerooy, Taldy–Bulak,
and recent discoveries like Tokhtonysay highlight the country’s strong
potential for expanding gold production.

Kyrgyzaltyn, the state-owned mining agency, manages all mines, often
partnering with foreign investors to bring expertise and capital, supporting
modernization and growth.

Although uranium and antimony production have declined since Soviet times,
Kyrgyzstan’s extensive coal reserves—estimated at 2.5 billion tons—offer
significant opportunities to boost domestic energy supply, with the Kara-Keche
deposit poised to increase annual coal output substantially.

While oil and natural gas production remain limited, the country’s rich
mineral base positions it well for tapping into critical raw materials
essential for emerging technologies and the green energy transition.
Exploration efforts targeting rare earth elements and industrial metals are
gaining momentum, signaling promising prospects for future development.

### Industry and manufacturing

Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kyrgyzstan’s industrial sector
experienced a sharp decline due to disrupted supply chains and the loss of
traditional Soviet markets. In 2005, industrial output (excluding gold
production) accounted for only about 14% of the country’s GDP, reflecting the
sector’s prolonged stagnation. However, since the early 2020s, the industrial
sector has shown signs of recovery and structural transformation.

By 2023, industry — including manufacturing, energy, and mining — contributed
approximately 22.6% of GDP. Industrial production grew by 5.6% in 2024, with
strong momentum continuing into 2025. This revival has been driven by renewed
investment in mining, energy, and light manufacturing, along with state-
supported programs such as the _100 Industrial Enterprises_ initiative.

Growth has been particularly strong in mining (especially gold and coal),
electricity generation, small-scale hydropower, and light industries like
textiles and food processing. Automotive assembly and domestic production of
construction materials are also emerging as growth areas.

Housing construction has also seen significant expansion, driven by population
growth, urbanization, and remittance-fueled demand. In 2024, the construction
sector grew by over 18%, with residential development leading the trend,
especially in Bishkek, Chuy, Osh and Jalal Abad provinces. Rising domestic
production of construction materials and increased private investment have
contributed to this boom, turning housing construction into one of the key
engines of non-extractive economic activity.

### Energy

Over 90% of Kyrgyzstan's electricity generation relies on hydropower,
primarily from large cascade plants on the Naryn River. However, the country
has historically exploited less than 15% of its estimated hydroelectric
potential of approximately 140 TWh annually. As of 2024, hydropower accounted
for around 90% of all electricity production, with small hydroelectric plants
contributing approximately 400 GWh alongside 12.8 billion kWh from large hydro
facilities.

Kyrgyzstan has limited domestic fossil fuel reserves and heavily depends on
natural gas imports from Uzbekistan. Thermal (coal- and gas-fired) plants
supplied 1.8 billion kWh in 2024, while hydropower produced 12.77 billion kWh;
the country imported 3.6 billion kWh to meet rising demand of 18.3 billion
kWh.

Energy losses remain high: in peak seasons, up to 45% of electricity may be
lost or diverted illegally. Per capita consumption remains elevated relative
to income levels, and while demand is high, a comprehensive national strategy
for demand reduction is not yet in place.

The country's infrastructure is aging: the national grid includes over 45,000
km of transmission lines, largely built during Soviet-era expansion, along
with approximately 3 GW of installed generation capacity, 80% of which is
hydropower.

Kyrgyzstan is actively expanding both large and small hydropower projects. The
proposed **Kambar-Ata-1** project — a 1,860 MW dam on the Naryn River— has
received roadmap support from Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan and
secured at least US $18.6 million in World Bank development funding by
mid-2024. When operational (expected by 2028), it is projected to generate 5.6
billion kWh annually, enabling year-round domestic supply, seasonal export
capacity, and support for the CASA-1000 transmission corridor.

Small hydropower capacity is also scaling up: private plants are expected to
reach 400–500 MW by 2027–2028, adding roughly 600 million kWh annually. The
country is also beginning to diversify its energy mix with solar and wind: a
200 MW solar plant near Tokmok is expected by 2025, and additional solar (400
MW) and wind (100 MW) projects are in development as of 2024.

Hydropower remains the backbone of Kyrgyzstan's energy sector, with ongoing
diversification and modernization efforts aimed at reducing energy losses,
enhancing self-sufficiency, and boosting exports to neighboring countries.

### Services

Glamping in Kyrgyzstan

Kyrgyzstan’s tourism sector has seen impressive growth over the past two
decades. From attracting around 450,000 tourists annually in the early 2000s,
the country welcomed over 8.6 million visitors in 2024. This rapid growth has
boosted tourism service exports to nearly $480 million in the first half of
2024 alone. Visitors primarily come from neighboring Central Asian countries
like Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Russia, but there is a growing number of
tourists from China, South Korea, Türkiye, and Europe. Despite earlier
challenges related to limited investment, the sector is benefiting from
improved infrastructure, easier visa regulations, and targeted government
promotion.

The financial sector in Kyrgyzstan plays a critical role in supporting
economic diversification. Banks and microfinance institutions provide much-
needed credit and financial services to small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs) and rural entrepreneurs. Microfinance, in particular, has expanded
rapidly, increasing financial inclusion and empowering grassroots economic
activity.

## Poverty

In 2024, the poverty rate at the $3.65-per-day threshold fell to 4.4%, down
from 7.1% in 2023, supported by lower inflation and robust economic growth.
However, rising urban poverty is a concern: by 2022/23, urban poverty levels
had surpassed those in rural areas. According to the L2KGZ survey, 50% of
respondents identified jobs as the top economic challenge, while real
household incomes stagnated in the latter half of 2024.

United Nations World Food Programme (WFP) reports that approximately 30% of
Kyrgyzstan’s population lives in poverty, with an additional 10% at risk of
falling below the poverty line. The WFP highlights vulnerability to both
internal and external shocks, including high dependence on food imports,
reduced remittances due to changing labor migration policies; particularly in
Russia; and climate-related challenges such as drought and glacier melt. Food
prices remain around 50% higher than pre-pandemic levels, leaving 36% of the
population unable to afford a nutritious diet, while 72% of households resort
to coping mechanisms to cover basic needs.