The **economy of Fiji** is one of the most developed among the Pacific
islands. Nevertheless, Fiji is a developing country endowed with forest,
mineral and fish resources. The country has a large agriculture sector heavily
based on subsistence agriculture. Sugar exports and the tourism industry are
the main sources of foreign exchange. There are also light manufacturing and
mining sectors.

The country's petroleum production remains at zero despite previous hints at
reserves, and it relies entirely on imports to meet its refined petroleum
product needs.

As of 2025, Fiji's population was estimated to be approximately 949,992,
reflecting a 0.73% increase from the previous year. The country's tallest
building is the 30-story Grand Fijian Tower in Suva.

## Development plan

In September 2002, the government announced a 20-year development plan. Among
other things, it aimed to give indigenous Fijians a greater stake in the
economy. The plan envisages tax-relief to businesses owned or managed by
ethnic Fijians, along with greater protection for indigenous land and fishery
rights.

A major aim of the Fijian government is to achieve self-sufficiency in rice
production. Cattle farming, fishing, and forestry (especially pine trees) are
being encouraged to diversify the economy; the leading manufacturing
industries involve the processing of primary products. On 14 April 2005, the
Cabinet approved Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase's proposal to develop a
biofuels industry. Under the plan, ethanol is to be developed as a complement
to the sugar industry, with the hope of alleviating Fiji's dependence on
imported fossil fuel such as petrol.

On 15 August, Qarase said that the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
had granted assistance to Fiji to develop its biofuels project. Transformation
of the Fiji Sugar Corporation into an energy and sugar company would result in
a turnover of F$1 billion by 2025, he said, and would cut imports of crude
oil, generate export earnings, and provide a source of electricity. Energy
could be produced from copra, forest, and agricultural products, as well as
sugar. He touted the scheme as necessary for diversifying and strengthening
the sugar industry for its own survival, as well as for the national economy.
He said that the government of India had loaned F$86 million for upgrading of
Fiji's sugar mills, which would be completed in time for the 2007-2008
crushing season.

On 28 December 2005, John Teiwa of the Coconut Industry Development Authority
announced that a 20-year plan for the coconut industry would be launched in
2006. Financing from international investors, including the government of
India, would be sought to develop processing of virgin and extra virgin
coconut oil, with a view to venturing into foreign health markets. The
government expected an annual profit of F$120 million from the venture, Fiji
Village reported. Trials for the generation of fuel from coconut oil were also
in progress, Teiwa said.

## Sectors

### Agriculture and forestry

Fiji has a large subsistence agriculture sector, which accounts for 18% of
gross domestic product, although it employed some 70% of the workforce as of
2001[_citation needed_]. Sugarcane is the main agricultural product grown in
Fiji. Other agricultural products grown in Fiji include coconuts, copra,
ginger, cassava, bananas, rice, sweet potatoes, taro, pickles, kava,
pineapples, and plantains. Livestock such as cattle, pigs, and goats are also
reared for meat. Fishing is important to the economy as well, with fish
products accounting for almost one-tenth of revenue from exports in the early
21st century. Lumber is another major industry, with timber being Fiji's
third-largest export commodity.

In 2018 Fiji produced:

  * 1.3 million tons of sugarcane
  * 72 thousand tons of cassava
  * 49 thousand tons of taro
  * 22 thousand tons of coconut
  * 21 thousand tons of vegetable
  * 10 thousand tons of ginger
  * 8 thousand tons of sweet potato
  * 7 thousand tons of rice
  * 6 thousand tons of pineapple
  * 5 thousand tons of plantain

In 2019 Fiji produced 41,892 tons of meat.

### Manufacturing

Sugarcane processing makes up a significant portion of industrial activity.
Fiji also has successful garment manufacturing and mineral water bottling
industries. Other manufacturing activities include boat building, particularly
the construction of fishing boats and pleasure craft, cement making, brewing,
and paint manufacturing. Fiji is also a manufacturer and net exporter of wood
products such as pine chips, sawnwood and wood-based panels.

### Mining

Gold, silver, and copper are mined in Fiji.

### Tourism

Tourism has expanded rapidly since the early 1980s and is the leading economic
activity in the islands accounting for 24.4% of GDP in 2019. Excluding cruise
ship passengers, more than 960,000 people visited Fiji in 2019. An increase of
over 500,000 since 1999 when 409,000 tourists visited.[_citation needed_]

In 1999 a quarter of tourists came from Australia, with large contingents also
coming from New Zealand, Japan, the United States and United Kingdom. Over
62,000 of the tourists were American, a number that had steadily increased
since the start of regularly scheduled non-stop air service from Los Angeles.
Tourism earned more than $300 million in foreign exchange for Fiji in 1998, an
amount exceeding the revenue from its two largest goods exports (sugar and
garments).[_citation needed_]

The effects of the Asian financial crisis led to a sharp drop in the number of
Asian tourists visiting Fiji in 1997 and 1998, which contributed to a
substantial drop in gross domestic product. Positive growth returned in 1999,
however, aided by a 20% devaluation of the Fijian dollar. 2005 was a record
year for the tourism sector, with 9% growth according to Viliame Gavoka, Chief
Executive of the Fiji Visitors Bureau.[_citation needed_]

### High-tech

Fiji has a high-tech industry with a number of software development companies
present in the country. In 2021, Fiji's high-tech exports were worth about
$1.95 million.

## Trade

| This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section
by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged
and removed. _( October 2024)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
Fiji runs a persistently large trade deficit. Imports in 1998 accounted for
US$721 million, and exports for US$510 million, resulting in a US$116 million
deficit. Tourism revenue yields services surplus, however, which keeps the
current account of its balance of payments roughly in balance ($13 million in
1998). Australia accounts for between 35% and 45% of Fiji's trade, with New
Zealand, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan varying year-by-year
between 5% and 15% each.

Foodstuffs, machinery, mineral fuels, beverages, tobacco, and manufactured
goods are the principal imports. The two largest exports are sugar and
garments, which each accounted for approximately one-quarter of export revenue
in 1998 (roughly $122 million each). The sugar industry suffered in 1997 due
to low world prices and rent disputes between farmers and landowners, and
again in 1998 from drought, but recovered in 1999.

The Fijian garment industry has developed rapidly since the introduction of
tax exemptions in 1988. The industry's output has increased nearly tenfold
since that time. Fish, lumber, molasses, coconut oil and ginger are also
important exports, although the last two are in decline. Forestry became
important as an export trade in the mid-1980s, when the pine plantations
planted in the 1950s and 1960s began to mature. They sell much fish.

Australia's Trade Commissioner Ross Bray revealed on 26 January 2006 that
Fiji's exports to Australia are achieving an annual growth rate of 5%. More
than 31,000 Australian companies were trading in the Pacific, half of them in
Fiji, Bray said. Fiji is progressing very rapidly.

## Investment

The government's policy of awarding tax concessions to large multinational
companies investing in Fiji has not proved universally popular. The Asian
Development Bank (ADB) has criticized it, saying that the concessions have
been abused and have not generated long-term investment. An ADB report in 2005
accused foreign entrepreneurs of leaving as soon as their concessions expired,
and alleged that administration of the concessions encouraged corruption and
bribery.

The leader of the Fiji Labour Party Mahendra Chaudhry echoed the view of the
ADB on 31 December 2005, saying that foreign companies repatriated much of the
profit made in Fiji, rather than investing it locally, while taking advantage
of the infrastructure funded by Fijian taxpayers without paying any taxes
themselves. Such policy discriminated against local businesses, he
claimed.[_citation needed_]

## Economic problems

Fiji's economic difficulties have been compounded by the effects of four coups
since the 1980s.[_citation needed_]

### Emigration

Since 1987, when the country was destabilized by two military coups, Fiji has
suffered a very high rate of emigration, particularly of skilled and
professional personnel. More than 70,000 people left the country in the
aftermath of the coups, majority of whom were Indo-Fijians. With the
continuing expiration of land leases and ongoing instability in the aftermath
of another coup in 2000, a further outflow of skilled workers has taken place.

A report in 2004 of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, published on 29 June 2005, found that 61% of Fiji's skilled
workers have either emigrated or gone abroad as guestworkers. Fiji's loss of
skilled workers was the world's fourth highest, behind Guyana, Jamaica, Haiti,
and Trinidad and Tobago. Fiji's Bureau of Statistics recorded 3595 workers as
having left the country between January and August 2004. Of these, 414 held
professional or technical jobs, 263 were in administrative or managerial
positions, and were clerks, supervisors, or related workers, and 118 were
sales workers.

Fiji's economy is increasingly reliant on remittances from citizens working
overseas. Personal remittances now run to more than F$200 million a year,
earning more than traditional sectors like sugar and garment manufacturing.
Recruitment of Fijians by foreign private military companies is a growing
source of revenue. By mid-2005, there were over 1,000 Fijians working in Iraq
and Kuwait as soldiers, security guards, drivers and labourers. In addition in
2006 there were more than 2,000 Fijian soldiers in the British Army, and in
2004 the British defence ministry even sent recruiting teams to Fiji to do
initial fitness and aptitude tests, cutting the costs of selection for poor
Fijian villagers who could not afford to fly to London to sign up.

### Property laws and investment problems

Low investment has been a long-term problem in Fiji, and property rights are
sometimes thought to be part of this problem because, by law, five sixths of
the land is owned communally by indigenous Fijians and may only be leased, not
purchased outright. However, the leasehold system is often misunderstood.

Leasehold tenure has not been a problem for the property sector. Houses all
over Fiji on communally owned land are on 99-year leases, which have proved
satisfactory as a basis for house ownership. Hotels also enjoy 99-year leases.
The prestigious Denarau development involving major hotels and resorts and
luxury properties is situated on communally owned land. It delivers
significant income to native owners and secure title to developers and their
customers.

In agricultural sector, there have been problems even though agricultural
leases are mandated at 30 years, following the extension by legislation (the
Agricultural Landlord and Tenant Act or ALTA) of all ten-year leases to thirty
years in 1977. The problem experienced in agriculture is the non-renewal
leases as landowners have been unhappy with the provisions in the ALTA for
indexing of rents to cope with inflation. That is an ongoing problem which
calls for urgent attention.

### Natural disasters

Drought in 1998 further damaged the sugar industry, but its recovery in 1999
contributed to robust GDP growth. Further damage to the economy (estimated at
US$30 million) was wrought by a cyclone that hit the northern island of Vanua
Levu in January 2003. Apart from the economic devastation, there were food
shortages and outbreaks of disease due to the pollution of the water
supply.[_citation needed_]

### Tourism woes

The aftermath of the political turmoil in 2000 resulted in a 10-percent
shrinkage in the economy, as investor confidence plummeted and tourist numbers
dropped more than 15% from 544,000 visitors in 1999 to under 434,000 by the
end of 2000. An estimated 7500 jobs were lost. There has been a gradual
recovery since 2001, when the 1997 constitution was restored and free
elections held.

The possibility of a return to a racially discriminatory constitution led to
fears that Fiji might forfeit its preferential arrangements with the European
Union for its sugar exports, and with Australia for its clothing industry, but
those fears have largely (but not entirely) subsided.

### Homelessness

In June 2003, a survey revealed a disturbingly high percentage of squatters,
about a tenth of Fijian citizens. 82,350 individuals in 13,725 households were
estimated to live in 182 squatter settlements, with Suva and Nausori being the
worst-affected areas. The number of squatter settlements had increased 14%
since January 2001, and 73% since 1996. Urban migration, unemployment, the
expiry of land leases, and the breakdown of nuclear and extended families were
among the factors blamed for the trend. The report projected the population of
squatters to grow to 90,000 in the Suva-Nausori corridor by 2006, putting
increasing strain on supplies of water, electricity, sewage, and road
services. On 14 September, Prime Minister Qarase said that the squatter
problem had become so serious that the government was looking abroad for
funding.

### Human Development Index

On 11 September 2005, the publication of the United Nations Human Development
Index downgraded Fiji from 81st in 2004 to 92nd in 2005, behind Pacific
neighbours Tonga and Samoa. Incomes had improved, the report said, with gross
domestic product rising from F$5440 to F$5880, but other aspects of the
quality of life enjoyed by Fiji Islanders had deteriorated. Life expectancy
had declined from 72.9 in 2000 to 69.6 in 2004 and 67.8 in 2005, while
literacy remained unchanged at 93%.

Joji Kotobalavu, the chief executive of the Prime Minister's Office, branded
the report "a joke." His dismissal drew strong reaction from Opposition Leader
Mahendra Chaudhry, who said that whereas Kotobalavu was paid to be the Prime
Minister's spin doctor, the HDI report was put together by professionals who
had no hidden agendas, and should therefore be taken very seriously.

Since 2005, the Human Development Index of Fiji has steadily risen from a
reading of 0.687 to 0.743, just above the global median for all countries of
0.74. As of 2020 Fiji ranked 90th out of 183 countries on the Human
Development Index.

## Economic statistics

### Income

**Gross national product (GNP):** US$101.48 billion; US$1820 per capita (2000)

**Gross domestic product (GDP):** US$5.48 billion; $US 6,202.2 per capita
(2018)

    purchasing power parity \- US$9.61 billion; US$11450 per capita (2020 estimate)

**GDP – real growth rate:** -6.6% (2008 est.)

**GDP – composition by sector:**  
_agriculture:_ 8.9%  
_industry:_ 13.5%  
_services:_ 77.6% (2006 est.)

**Population below poverty line:** 25.5%

**Household income or consumption by percentage share:**  
_lowest 10%:_ NA%  
_highest 10%:_ NA%

### Inflation rate (consumer prices)

1.6% (2002 est.) 3.8% (2017 est.)

### Workforce

**Labor force:** 360,000

**Female labor force** : 33.1%

**Labor force – by occupation:** subsistence agriculture 67%, wage earners
18%, salary earners 15% (1987)

**Unemployment rate:** 5.24% (2021 est.)

### Budget

_revenues:_ $540.65 million  
_expenditures:_ $742.65 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (1997
est.)

### Industries

tourism, sugar, clothing, copra, gold, silver, lumber, small cottage
industries

**Industrial production growth rate:** 2.9% (1995)

### Electricity

**Electricity – production:** 1000 GWh (2020)

**Electricity – production by source:**  
_fossil fuel:_ 420 GWh, 42% of total (2020)  
_hydro:_ 500 GWh, 50% of total (2020)  
_solar:_ 20 GWh, 2% of total (2020)

_other:_ 60 GWh, 6% of total (2020)

_nuclear:_ 0%

**Electricity – consumption:** 1,0002 GWh (2019)

**Electricity – exports:** 0 kWh (2020)

**Electricity – imports:** 0 kWh (2020)

#### Rural electrification

The Fiji Rural Electrification Policy 1993 has been used by the Fiji
Department of Energy in the implementation of rural electrification projects
which includes diesel schemes for villages, micro hydro projects, house
wiring, biofuel projects, solar home systems and grid extension. Villages and
communities have been paying 10% of the total project costs and government
pays 90%. In 2010, government reduced the contribution from communities to 5%
and this has increased the number of applicants.

### Agriculture

**Agriculture – products:** sugar cane, coconuts, cassava (tapioca), rice,
sweet potatoes, bananas, ginger, taro, kava; livestock: cattle, pigs, shrimp,
pickles, goats; fish. Island economies are at a disadvantage for harnessing
export opportunities due to the costs of transport.[_citation needed_] The
Fijian island of Cicia has set the goal of achieving 100% organic farming
which can bring with it economic and environmental benefits.

### Imports

US$921 million (1998)

**Imports – commodities:** machinery and transport equipment, petroleum
products, food, chemicals.

One in every seven dollars of Fiji's national income is spent on oil according
to the World Bank.

**Imports – partners:** Australia 35%, Japan 4.8%, Singapore 19.2%, New
Zealand 17.1% (2003).

### Debt and aid

**Debt – external:** US$136 million (2000)

**Economic aid – recipient:** $40.3 million (1995)

### Currency

1 Fijian dollar (F$) = 48 cents

**Exchange rates:** Fijian dollars (F$) per US$1 – 1.83 (November 2013),
1.72565 (August 2006), 1.9654 (January 2000), 1.9696 (1999), 1.9868 (1998),
1.4437 (1997), 1.4033 (1996), 1.4063 (1995)