The economic activity of the Federated States of Micronesia consists primarily
of subsistence agriculture and fishing. The islands have few mineral deposits
worth exploiting, except for high-grade phosphate. The potential for a tourist
industry exists, but the remoteness of the location and a lack of adequate
facilities hinder development. Financial assistance from the US is the primary
source of revenue, with the US pledged to spend $1.3 billion in the islands in
1986–2001. Geographical isolation and a poorly developed infrastructure are
major impediments to long-term growth.

Under the terms of the Compact of Free Association, the United States provided
FSM with around $2 billion in grants and services from 1986 to 2001. The
Compact's financial terms are being renegotiated for an extension period. In
2001 the U.S. provided more than $84 million in Compact grants—an amount
equivalent to over one-third of FSM's GDP—plus more than $20 million through
other federal programs. Total official development assistance from all sources
was more than $100 million in 2001, with nearly 90% of that total coming from
the U.S.

The FSM public sector plays a central role in the economy as the administrator
of the Compact money. The national and state-level governments employ over
one-half of the country's workers and provide services accounting for more
than 40% of GDP. Faced with the potential decrease or cessation of some of the
assistance programs upon the Compact's financial provisions' expiry in 2001,
the Government of the FSM in 1996 began to implement a program of economic
reforms designed to reduce the role of the public sector in the economy. In
addition, the advent of music startups using .fm domain names has provided a
new, albeit fairly small, stream of revenue to the government.

## Industries

The fishing industry is highly important. Foreign commercial fishing fleets
pay over $20 million annually for the right to operate in FSM territorial
waters. These licensing fees account for nearly 30% of domestic budgetary
revenue. Additionally, exports of marine products, mainly reexports of fish to
Japan, account for nearly 85% of export revenue.

The tourist industry is present but has been hampered by a lack of
infrastructure. Visitor attractions include scuba diving in each state, World
War II battle sites, and the ancient ruined city of Nan Madol on Pohnpei. Some
15,000 tourists visit the islands each year. The Asian Development Bank has
identified tourism as one of FSM's highest potential growth industries.

Farming is mainly subsistence, and its importance is declining. The principal
crops are coconuts, bananas, betel nuts, cassava, and sweet potatoes. Less
than 10% of the formal labor force and less than 7% of export revenue come
from the agriculture sector. Manufacturing activity is modest, consisting
mainly of the export of betel nut in Yap and production of buttons from
trochus shells.

## Taxation and trade

The large inflow of official assistance to FSM allows it to run a substantial
trade deficit and to have a much lighter tax burden than other states in the
region (11% of GDP in FSM compared to 18–25% elsewhere). The government also
borrowed against future Compact disbursements in the early 1990s, yielding an
external debt of $111 million in 1997 (over 50% of GDP).

There are no patent laws in Micronesia.