| This article includes a list of general references, but **it lacks
sufficient correspondinginline citations**. Please help to improve this
article by introducing more precise citations. _( August 2010)__(Learn how and
when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **economy ofMozambique** is $14.396 billion by gross domestic product as
of 2018, and has developed since the end of the Mozambican Civil War
(1977–1992). In 1987, the government embarked on a series of macroeconomic
reforms designed to stabilize the economy. These steps, combined with donor
assistance and political stability since the multi-party elections in 1994,
led to dramatic improvements in the country's growth rate. Inflation was low
during the late 1990s, although it rose again in 2000–2002. Fiscal reforms,
including the introduction of a value-added tax and reform of the customs
service, have improved the government's revenue collection abilities.

In spite of these gains, Mozambique remains dependent upon foreign assistance
for much of its annual budget. Subsistence agriculture continues to employ the
vast majority of the country's workforce. A substantial trade imbalance
persists. However, the opening of the Mozal aluminium smelter, the country's
largest foreign investment project to date, has increased export earnings.
Additional investment projects in titanium extraction and processing and
garment manufacturing should further close the import/export gap. Mozambique's
once substantial foreign debt has been reduced through forgiveness and
rescheduling under the International Monetary Fund's Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) and Enhanced HIPC initiatives, and is now at a manageable
level. Mozambique is a least developed country according to United Nations.

## History

Historical development of real GDP per capita in Mozambique, since 1960

### The Portuguese rule

Although the Portuguese participated in the trading networks of East Africa as
early as the 16th century, they did not establish hegemonic (total) colonial
dominance over the entire territory that now comprises Mozambique until the
19th century. Portugal founded settlements, trading posts, forts and ports.
Cities, towns and villages were founded all over the territory by the
Portuguese, like Lourenço Marques, Beira, Vila Pery, Vila Junqueiro, Vila
Cabral and Porto Amélia. Others were expanded and developed greatly under
Portuguese rule, like Quelimane, Nampula and Sofala. By this time, Mozambique
had become a Portuguese colony, but administration was left to the trading
companies (like Mozambique Company and Niassa Company) who had received long-
term leases from Lisbon. By the mid-1920s, the Portuguese created a highly
exploitative and coercive settler economy, in which African natives were
forced to work on the fertile lands taken over by Portuguese settlers.
Indigenous African peasants mainly produced cash crops designated for sale in
the markets of Portugal. Major cash crops included cotton, cashews, tea and
rice. This arrangement ended in 1932 after the takeover in Portugal by the new
António de Oliveira Salazar government. Thereafter, Mozambique, along with
other Portuguese colonies, was put under the direct control of Lisbon. In
1951, it became an overseas province. The economy expanded rapidly during the
1950s and 1960s, attracting thousands of Portuguese settlers to the country.
It was around this time that the first nationalist guerrilla groups began to
form in Tanzania and other African countries. The strong industrial and
agricultural development that did occur throughout the 1950s, 1960s and early
1970s was based on Portuguese development plans, and also included British and
South African investment.

In 1959–60, Mozambique's major exports included cotton, cashew nuts, tea,
sugar, copra and sisal. The expanding economy of the Portuguese overseas
province was fuelled by foreign direct investment, and public investment which
included ambitious state-managed development plans. British capital owned two
of the large sugar concessions (the third was Portuguese), including the
famous Sena states. The Matola Oil Refinery, Procon, was controlled by England
and the United States. In 1948 the petroleum concession was given to the
Mozambique Gulf Oil Company. At Maotize coal was mined; the industry was
chiefly financed by Belgian capital. 60% of the capital of the Compagnie de
Charbons de Mozambique was held by the Societe Miniere et Geologique Belge,
30% by the Mozambique Company, and the remaining 10% by the governing
authorities of the territory.

Three banks were in operation, the Banco Nacional Ultramarino, Portuguese,
Barclays Bank, D.C.O., British, and the _Banco Totta e Standard de Moçambique_
(a joint-venture between Standard Bank of South Africa and Banco Totta &
Açores of the Portuguese mainland). Nine out of the twenty-three insurance
companies were Portuguese. 80% of life-insurance was in the hands of foreign
companies which testifies the openness of the economy. The Portuguese overseas
province of Mozambique was the first territory of Portugal, including the
European mainland, to distribute Coca-Cola. Lately the Lourenço Marques Oil
Refinery was established by the Sociedade Nacional de Refinação de Petróleo
(SONAREP) – a Franco-Portuguese syndicate. In the sisal plantations Swiss
capital was invested, and in copra concerns, a combination of Portuguese,
Swiss and French capital was invested. The large availability of capital from
both Portuguese and international origin, allied to the wide range of natural
resources and the growing urban population, lead to an impressive growth and
development of the economy. From the late stages of this notable period of
high growth and huge development effort started in the 1950s, was the
construction of the Cahora Bassa dam by the Portuguese, which started to fill
in December 1974 after construction was commenced in 1969.

In the face of intransigent Portuguese ruling authorities, the main
nationalist movement, FRELIMO, began a guerrilla war which gradually wrested
control of parts of the northernmost regions of the territory from the
Portuguese. The Mozambican War of Independence came to an end in 1974
following a leftist military coup in Portugal. The new left-wing government in
Lisbon had no wish to maintain an empire and negotiations on the country's
independence began immediately. In 1975, after the leftist military coup of 24
April 1974 in Portugal that overthrew the Estado Novo regime which had
governed the country and its overseas territories, the colonial wars that
raged in the various Portuguese African territories since the early 1960s
ended. At independence, Mozambique's industrial base was well-developed by
Sub-Saharan Africa standards, thanks to a boom in investment in the 1960s and
early 1970s. Indeed, in 1973, value-added in manufacturing was the sixth
highest in Sub-Saharan Africa. However, further industrialisation was stopped
by the hasty exodus of 90 percent of the ethnic Portuguese citizens during and
after the independence process which was concluded on June 25, 1975. The rapid
exodus of Mozambique's Portuguese population left its economy in disarray. The
situation was exacerbated by the Mozambican Civil War (1977–1992) during the
following years that destroyed the remaining wealth and left the former
Portuguese Overseas Province in a state of disrepair.

### Independent Mozambique

GDP per capita (current), compared to neighbouring countries (world average =
100)

Mozambique became an independent state in 1975. The exodus of trained
Portuguese workers and the eruption of the Mozambican Civil War in 1977
opposing RENAMO to FRELIMO, drove the country to absolute chaos. Mozambique
became an independent republic and the Frente de Libertacao de Mocambique
(FRELIMO), the socialist guerrilla organization that had fought the colonial
war against Portugal, assumed power. Over the next several years, FRELIMO
pursued numerous socialist policies, including nationalization of land and
large industries, centralized planning, and heavy funding for the national
educational and health systems, which however, remained weak for decades in
independent Mozambique, and still are among the most ineffective and
underfunded in the world. The exodus (mass departure) of the Portuguese
following independence in 1975 facilitated the takeover of many shops by
Mozambicans. Unfortunately, the exodus, which totaled over 275,000 ethnic
Portuguese, also led to a huge loss of professionals, productive machinery,
entrepreneurs, and skilled workers. By the early 1980s, Mozambique became what
Joseph Hanlon—author of _Peace Without Profit: How the IMF Blocks Rebuilding
in Mozambique_ —called a "Cold War battlefield."[_page needed_] The term
refers to the situation in which socialist FRELIMO, with Soviet backing, was
forced to fight a lengthy civil war (Mozambican Civil War) against a
counterinsurgency movement of Mozambicans named RENAMO, funded and directed by
the neighboring white minority states of apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia.
The Cold War was defined by animosity between capitalist and socialist world
powers, and though there was never an outright military conflict between the
former and the latter, each respectively funded counterinsurgency movements
against governments they disfavored. The capitalist governments of South
Africa and Zimbabwe feared that a successfully ruled African socialist system
might send a message of revolution and self-rule to citizens in
contemporaneous majority rule African countries, such as their own.

In 1983, however, the Fourth Congress of FRELIMO initiated the first steps
towards privatization by allowing for a partial dismantling of state farms.
The political pressure of the ideologically charged civil war, in conjunction
with the excruciating need for aid and funds to finance imports, compelled
FRELIMO to negotiate its first structural adjustment package (SAP) with the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (commonly referred to as
the Bretton Woods institutions) in 1986. The series of SAPs that followed
thereafter required privatization of major industries, less government
spending, deregulation of the economy, and trade liberalization. The SAPs,
therefore, have essentially focused on the implementation of an unfettered
free market economy. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, more than 1400
privatizations of public enterprises took place. At the time, this was the
largest privatization programme in Africa. The tendency towards austerity,
privatization and other neoliberal reforms has continued throughout the
following decades, for instance with the PARPA action plan (2001-2014) whose
stated goal was the reduction of poverty. However, PARPA largely focused on
attracting multinational corporations in sectors such as aluminium and oil. It
has been noted that GDP growth in this period did not result in a "trickle-
down" effect: in fact, the poorest segments of society have become even
poorer, while public education and healthcare also suffered from the austerity
measures.

In 1995 alone, Mozambique received $1.115 billion in aid. In 1999, the total
external debt stood at $4.8 billion. Fortunately, in the same year significant
economic recovery did occur, as the real GDP growth rate reached 10 percent.

Today, the economy of Mozambique continues to be dominated by agriculture.
Major exports include prawns, cotton, cashew nuts, sugar, citrus, copra and
coconuts, and timber. Export partners, in turn, include Spain, South Africa,
Portugal, the United States, Japan, Malawi, India, and Zimbabwe. Imports, such
as farm equipment and transport equipment, are capital goods that are worth
more than agricultural products, hence Mozambique's large trade deficit. The
country also imports food, clothing, and petroleum products. Import partners
include South Africa, Zimbabwe, Saudi Arabia, Portugal, the United States,
Japan, and India. In the past several years, the value of imports outweighed
the value of exports by 5 to 1 or more—a factor that obliges Mozambique to
depend heavily on foreign aid and loans by foreign commercial banks and the
Bretton Woods Institutions (BWIs).

Due to its reliance on loans, Mozambique also continues to commit itself to
the IMF's loan conditions. In 2024, for instance, a new support package from
the IMF was coupled to requirements such as further boosting the private
sector and freezing wages. Concurrently, Mozambique has also intensified its
relations with Chinese firms and financial institutions. An important example
is the Maputo–Katembe bridge, the longest suspension bridge in Africa, which
was realized by the China Road and Bridge Corporation and with Exim loans
between 2014 and 2018. China is said to have "become Mozambique’s top
infrastructure partner" between 2014 and 2024.

## Sectors

All economic sectors ranging from manufacturing and agriculture to tourism and
finance, declined sharply after independence from Portugal in 1975, but picked
up in the 2000s after the end of the Mozambican Civil War, although they are
still performing well below potential.

### Gas and oil reserves

_The L-shaped recovery with low oil prices in the coming years._ Source:
RisCura: Bright Africa

Recent oil and gas discoveries across East Africa, most notably in Mozambique
and Tanzania, have seen the region emerge as a new player in the global oil
and gas Industry.

The discoveries have driven billions of dollars in annual investment to the
region. According to BMI estimates, the finds in the last few years are more
than that of any other region in the world, and the discoveries are expected
to continue for the next few years.

### Agriculture, fishing and forestry

In Mozambique, agriculture is the mainstay of the economy and the country has
a great potential for growth in the sector. Agriculture employs more than 80
percent of the labour force and provides livelihoods to the vast majority of
over 23 million inhabitants. Agriculture contributed 31.5 percent of the GDP
in 2009, while commerce and services accounted for 44.9 percent. By contrast,
20 percent of the total export value in 2009 originated from the agriculture
sector, mostly through the export of fish (mainly shrimps and prawns), timber,
copra, cashew nuts and citrus, cotton, coconuts, tea and tobacco.

Rural women taking transport to a local market in Mozambique. A large portion
of the populations relies on small-scale agriculture and related marketplace
for food security and livelihoods.

Agricultural potential is high, particularly in the fertile northern regions,
which accounts for the bulk of the country's agricultural surplus. The main
cash crops are sugar, copra, cashew nuts, tea, and tobacco. Total sugar
production was expected to rise by 160% in the 2000s, which would make the
country a major net exporter for the first time since independence. All the
plantations and refineries have been privatized. Marine products, particularly
prawns, are Mozambique's largest single export. There is an abundance of
marine resources that are not fully exploited. After the Mozambican Civil War,
the return of internally displaced persons and the gradual restoration of
rural markets have enabled Mozambique to increase agricultural production
dramatically.

Mozambique produced, in 2018:

  * 8.5 million tons of cassava (9th largest producer in the world);
  * 3 million tons of sugarcane;
  * 1.6 million tons of maize;
  * 625 thousand tons of sweet potato;
  * 578 thousand tons of banana;
  * 343 thousand tons of tomatoes;
  * 273 thousand tons of potato;
  * 227 thousand tons of coconut;
  * 138 thousand tons of onion;
  * 134 thousand tons of rice;
  * 108 thousand tons of cashew nuts (11th largest producer in the world);
  * 107 thousand tons of peanut;
  * 93 thousand tons of tobacco;
  * 90 thousand tons of sorghum;
  * 89 thousand tons of cowpea;
  * 85 thousand tons of castor bean;
  * 66 thousand tons of pineapple;
  * 65 thousand tons of sesame seed;
  * 50 thousand tons of beans;
  * 48 thousand tons of cotton;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.

### Food security, vulnerability and risk management

It is estimated that 64 percent of Mozambique's population is food insecure.
The prevalence is higher in the southern region (75 percent). Mozambique is a
net importer of food. Total annual cereal import requirements average 0.89
million tons (0.14 million of maize, 0.39 of rice and 0.36 of wheat).
Mozambique must also import substantial quantities of meat and livestock
products.

Despite good land and water availability, much of the food system relies on
smallholder farmers which are vulnerable to natural disasters, exacerbating
food insecurity challenges.

### Mining and semi-processing

There are large mineral deposits, but exploration has been constrained by the
civil war (1977–1992) and poor infrastructure. The World Bank has estimated
that there was the potential for exports worth US$200m by 2005 – in the late
1990s they totaled US$3.6m, some 1% of total exports, and a contribution of
less than 2% of GDP. Minerals currently being mined include marble, bentonite,
coal, gold, bauxite, granite, titanium and gemstones. Illegal exports from
artisanal production are estimated at US$50 million.[_original research?_]

Mozambique exported its first batch of coal in 2011 and expects to become the
world's largest coal exporter. It is also spending about US$50 billion in
infrastructure projects to access its coal reserves. Mozambique is reported to
have the fourth largest reserves of natural gas in the world, after Russia,
Iran, and Qatar.

### Manufacturing

Although very well developed during the 1960s and early 1970s,
industrialisation declined rapidly with the withdrawal of most Portuguese
after independence. Since 1995 production has increased sharply and was
expected to grow by 33% in 2001 due to the expansion (costing US$860m) of the
Mozal aluminium smelter which was approved in mid-2001. The country's largest
ever foreign investment, Mozal has little impact on employment, but is making
a substantial contribution to balance of payments through taxes generated.
Exports generated in the first quarter of 2001 were worth US$85.3, the primary
factor for the 172% expansion in Mozambique's exports for the period.
Completion of the smelter resulted in aluminium accounting for up to 70% of
exports. Construction materials, agricultural processing, beverages, and
consumer goods were the main sub-sectors.

### Tourism

This sector declined sharply after independence from Portugal, but has been
developed, although it is still performing well below potential. The national
strategy is to promote high-value, low-volume tourism. The first section of
the "Peace Park" initiative which links with Kruger Park in South Africa, and
Gonarezhou in Zimbabwe, was a project aimed at the development of tourism.

### Telecommunication

Immediately after a long civil war ended in 1992 the country started to reform
telecommunication sector. The mobile sub-sector has experienced excellent
growth rates following the introduction of competition in 2003 between Vodacom
Mozambique and mCel, the incumbent mobile subsidiary of the national telco,
Telecomunicações de Moçambique (TDM). The government is intent on introducing
competition to the fixed-line sector as well, but it is hesitating to
privatise TDM. All other services are open to competition, subject to
licensing by the industry regulator, INCM. Internet usage in the country has
been hampered by the inadequate fixed-line infrastructure and the high cost of
international bandwidth, but this market sector has started to accelerate
following the introduction of various kinds of broadband services including
ADSL, cable modems, WiMAX wireless broadband and mobile data services, and
then the landing of the first international submarine fibre optic cable in the
country (SEACOM) in 2009. Further improvements can be expected from the
ongoing rollout of 3G mobile services and a national fibre backbone network as
well as the landing of the second international fibre (EASSy) in 2010. The
lower cost of bandwidth has already started to trickle down to lower consumer
prices in some service segments, while others have remained
unchanged.[_citation needed_]

### Finance

The banking system, dominated by the Portuguese collapsed after independence
in 1975. From an earlier position (in the 1980s) of central government control
of the economy, Mozambique has initiated rapid reforms in recent years,
accelerating the implementation of market-based economic policies, and
committing to a policy of fiscal and monetary discipline. In 1995 the
government introduced its medium-term economic growth, strategy which it
continues to pursue. Since the late 1990s, both national and international
banking, established an environment for rapid economic growth and development
of the financial system. On 11 December 2012, the Mozambican Government
acquire the Portuguese shares of BNI Banco Nacional de Investimento, owning
100% of the bank and turning it into the country's development bank and
nominated a former Governor of the Bank of Mozambique, Adriano Maleiane as
CEO.

## Macroeconomic review

Alleviating poverty: at the end of the civil war in 1992, Mozambique ranked
among the poorest countries in the world. It still ranks among the least
developed countries, with very low socioeconomic indicators. In the last
decade, however, it has experienced a notable economic recovery. Per capita
GDP in 2000 was estimated at $222; in the mid-1980s, it was $120. With a high
foreign debt (originally $5.7 billion at 1998 net present value) and a good
track record on economic reform, Mozambique was the first African country to
receive debt relief under the initial Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC)
Initiative. In April 2000, Mozambique qualified for the Enhanced HIPC program
as well and attained its completion point in September 2001. This led to the
Paris Club members agreeing in November 2001 to substantially reduce the
remaining bilateral debt. This will lead to the complete forgiveness of a
considerable volume of bilateral debt, including that owed to the United
States.

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2024.

Year  | GDP  
(in bil. US$ PPP) | GDP per capita  
(in US$ PPP) | GDP  
(in bil. US$ nominal) | GDP growth  
(real)  | Inflation  
(in Percent)  | Government debt  
(Pct. of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 2.3  | 197  | 4.6  | 4.2%  | 2.0%  | n/a   
1985  | 2.3  | 181  | 4.5  | 1.0%  | 30.8%  | n/a   
1990  | 3.5  | 270  | 3.5  | 1.0%  | 43.7%  | n/a   
1995  | 4.7  | 304  | 3.1  | 2.1%  | 47.7%  | n/a   
2000  | 7.9  | 444  | 5.9  | 0.8%  | 12.7%  | 96%   
2005  | 13.5  | 657  | 8.9  | 6.3%  | 6.4%  | 60%   
2006  | 15.2  | 723  | 9.5  | 9.9%  | 13.2%  | 40%   
2007  | 16.9  | 778  | 10.8  | 7.6%  | 10.4%  | 31%   
2008  | 18.4  | 824  | 12.9  | 6.9%  | 14.5%  | 33%   
2009  | 19.6  | 855  | 12.3  | 5.9%  | 3.8%  | 39%   
2010  | 21.1  | 898  | 11.4  | 6.7%  | 12.4%  | 39%   
2011  | 23.1  | 955  | 14.6  | 7.1%  | 11.2%  | 34%   
2012  | 25.4  | 1,022  | 16.7  | 8.0%  | 2.6%  | 37%   
2013  | 27.5  | 1,078  | 17.2  | 6.6%  | 4.3%  | 49%   
2014  | 30.2  | 1,148  | 18.0  | 7.7%  | 2.6%  | 63%   
2015  | 32.7  | 1,210  | 16.2  | 7.4%  | 3.6%  | 86%   
2016  | 34.6  | 1,243  | 12.1  | 4.7%  | 18.4%  | 125%   
2017  | 36.1  | 1,261  | 13.3  | 2.6%  | 15.8%  | 104%   
2018  | 38.5  | 1,307  | 15.0  | 3.5%  | 3.2%  | 106%   
2019  | 41.5  | 1,370  | 15.5  | 2.3%  | 5.7%  | 98%   
2020  | 43.5  | 1,394  | 14.2  | -1.2%  | 0.9%  | 120%   
2021  | 46.2  | 1,440  | 16.2  | 2.4%  | 6.6%  | 104%   
2022  | 51.7  | 1,567  | 18.9  | 4.4%  | 10.4%  | 100%   
2023  | 56.4  | 1,665  | 21.0  | 5.4%  | 7.0%  | 94%   
2024  | 60.3  | 1,730  | 22.5  | 4.3%  | 3.5%  | 96%   
  
## Rebounding growth

The resettlement of war refugees and successful economic reform have led to a
high natural increase rate: the average growth rate from 1993 to 1999 was
6.7%; from 1997 to 1999, it averaged more than 10% per year. The devastating
floods of early 2000 slowed GDP growth to a 2.1%; estimates point to a full
recovery in 2001. The government projects have caused the economy to continue
to expand between 7%-10% a year for the next 5 years, although rapid expansion
in the future hinges on several major foreign investment projects, continued
economic reform, and the revival of the agriculture, transportation, and
tourism sectors. More than 75% of the population engages in small scale
agriculture, which still suffers from inadequate infrastructure, commercial
networks and investment. Yet 88% of Mozambique's arable land is still
uncultivated; focusing economic growth in this sector is a major challenge for
the government.

## Low inflation

The government's tight control of spending and the money supply, combined with
financial sector reform, successfully reduced inflation from 70% in 1994 to
less than 5% from 1998 to 1999. Rates spiked in 2000, however, to a rate of
12.7% due to economic disruptions stemming from the devastating floods.
Starting 2001 the inflation was in the range of 5% and 12%.

2003 - 5.2%; 2004 - 7.5%; 2005 - 7.6%; 2006 - 11.8%; 2007 - 7.4%; 2008 - 8.4%;
2009 - 4.2%; 2010 - 10.0%; 2011 - 11.1%

## Extensive economic reform

Economic reform has been extensive. Over 1,200 state-owned enterprises (mostly
small) have been privatized. Preparations for privatization and/or sector
liberalization are underway for the remaining parastatals, including
telecommunications, electricity, water service, airports, ports, and the
railroads. The government frequently selects a strategic foreign investor when
privatizing a parastatal. Additionally, customs duties have been reduced, and
customs management has been streamlined and reformed. The government
introduced a highly successful value-added tax in 1999 as part of its efforts
to increase domestic revenues. Plans for 2001-02 include Commercial Code
reform; comprehensive judicial reform; financial sector strengthening;
continued civil service reform; improved government budget, audit, and
inspection capability; and introduction of the private management of water
systems in major cities. The process of liberalization in Mozambique was an
initiative from the World Bank. In the Mid 1990s, the World Bank made it
necessary for the country to liberalize its cashew industry. The lifting of
protectionist measures for the cashew industry in Mozambique was an attempt to
increase the incomes of cashew farmers and reduce poverty in the country. This
policy of liberalization has been one of the most contentious
policies.[_citation needed_]

## Improving trade imbalance

In recent years, the value of imports has surpassed that of exports by almost
2:1, an improvement over the 4:1 ratio of the immediate post-war years. In
2000 imports were $1,217 million, and exports were $723 million. Support
programs provided by development partners have largely compensated for balance
of payments shortfalls. The medium-term outlook for exports is encouraging,
since a number of foreign investment projects should lead to substantial
export growth and a better trade balance. Mozal, a large aluminum smelter that
commenced production in mid-2000, has greatly expanded the nation's trade
volume. Traditional Mozambican exports include cashews, shrimp, fish, copra,
sugar, cotton, tea, and citrus fruits. Most of these industries are being
rehabilitated. Mozambique is becoming less dependent on imports for basic food
and manufactured goods due to steady increases in local production.

## Statistics

**GDP:** purchasing power parity - $39.16 billion (2018 est.)

**GDP - real growth rate:** 3% (2017 est.)

**GDP - per capita:** purchasing power parity - $1,327.9 (2018 est.)

**GDP - composition by sector:**  
_agriculture:_ 22.3% (2017 est.)  
_industry:_ 23% (2017 est.)  
_services:_ 54.7% (2017 est.)

**Household income or consumption by percentage share:**  
_lowest 10%:_ 1.9% (2008)  
_highest 10%:_ 36.7% (2008)

**Distribution of family income - Gini index:** 47.3 (2002)

**Inflation rate (consumer prices):** 15.3% (2017 est.)

**Labor force:** 12.98 million (2017 est.)

**Labor force - by occupation:** agriculture 74.4%, industry 3.9%, services
21.7% (2017 est.)

**Unemployment rate:** 24.5% (2017 est.)

**Budget:**  
_revenues:_ $2.758 billion (2017 est.)  
_expenditures:_ $3.607 billion (2017 est.)

**Industries:** food, beverages, chemicals (fertilizer, soap, paints),
aluminium, petroleum products, textiles, cement, glass, asbestos, tobacco

**Industrial production growth rate:** 10.5% (2017 est.)

**Electricity - production:** 19.58 billion kWh (2015 est.)

**Electricity - consumption:** 13.86 billion kWh (2015 est.)

**Electricity - exports:** 12.88 billion kWh (2015 est.)

**Electricity - imports:** 10.55 billion kWh (2015 est.)

**Oil - consumption:** 14,390 bbl/d (2,288 m3/d) (2006 est.)

**Oil - proved reserves:** 0 bbl (0 m3) (1 January 2006 est.)

**Natural gas - production:** 5.695 billion cu m (2015 est.)

**Natural gas - consumption:** 1.895 billion cu m (2015 est.)

**Natural gas - exports:** 3.8 billion cu m (2015 est.)

**Natural gas - imports:** 0 cu m (2013 est.)

**Natural gas - proved reserves:** 2.832 trillion cu m (1 January 2017 est.)

**Agriculture - products:** cotton, cashew nuts, sugar cane, tea, cassava
(tapioca), coconuts, sisal, citrus and tropical fruits; potatoes, sunflowers,
beef, poultry

**Exports:** $4.773 billion (2017 est.)

**Exports - commodities:** aluminum, prawns, cashews, cotton, sugar, citrus,
timber; bulk electricity

**Exports - partners:** India 28.1%, Netherlands 24.4%, South Africa 16.7%
(2017)

**Imports:** $5.021 billion (2017 est.)

**Imports - commodities:** machinery and equipment, vehicles, fuel, chemicals,
metal products, foodstuffs, textiles

**Imports - partners:** South Africa 36.8%, China 7%, UAE 6.8%, India 6.2%,
Portugal 4.4% (2017)

**Debt - external:** $10.27 billion (31 December 2017 est.)

**Currency:** 1 metical (Mt) = 100 centavos

**Exchange rates:** meticais (MZM) per US dollar - 24.125 (2008 est.), 26.264
(2007), 25.4 (2006)

**Fiscal year:** calendar year