| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Economy of Guatemala" – news **·** newspapers **·** books
**·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( January 2009)__(Learn how and when to remove this
message)_  
---|---  
Historical GDP per capita development of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras

The **economy of Guatemala** is a considered a developing economy, highly
dependent on agriculture, particularly on traditional crops such as coffee,
sugar, and bananas. Guatemala's GDP per capita is roughly one-third of
Brazil's. The Guatemalan economy is the largest in Central America. It grew
3.3 percent on average from 2015 to 2018. However, Guatemala remains one of
the poorest countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, having highly
unequal incomes and chronically malnourished children. The country is beset by
political insecurity, and lacks skilled workers and infrastructure. It depends
on remittances for nearly one-tenth of the GDP.

The 1996 peace accords ended the 36-years-long Guatemalan Civil War, and
removed a major obstacle to foreign investment. Since then Guatemala has
pursued important reforms and macroeconomic stabilization. On 1 July 2006, the
Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) entered into force between the
United States and Guatemala. It has since spurred increased investment in the
export sector. The distribution of income remains highly unequal, with 12% of
the population living below the international poverty line. Guatemala's large
expatriate community in the United States, has made it the top remittance
recipient in Central America. These inflows are a primary source of foreign
income, equivalent to nearly two-thirds of exports.

Guatemala's gross domestic product for 1990 was estimated at $19.1 billion,
with real growth slowing to approximately 3.3%. Ten years later, in 2000, it
rose from 1 to 4% and by 2010 it had fallen back to 3%, according to the World
Bank. The final peace accord in December 1996 left Guatemala well-positioned
for rapid economic growth.[_citation needed_]

Guatemala's economy is dominated by the private sector, which generates about
85% of GDP.[_citation needed_] Most of its manufacturing is light assembly and
food processing, geared to the domestic, U.S., and Central American markets.
In 1990 the labor force participation rate for women was 42%, later increasing
by 1% in 2000 to 43% and 51% in 2010. For men, the labor force participation
rate in 1990 was about 89%, decreased to 88% in 2000, and increased up to 90%
in 2010 (World Bank). Self-employment for men is about 50%, while the rate for
women is about 32% (Pagàn 1).

Over the past several years, tourism and exports of textiles, apparel, and
nontraditional agricultural products such as winter vegetables, fruit, and cut
flowers have boomed, while more traditional exports such as sugar, bananas,
and coffee continue to represent a large share of the export market.[_citation
needed_]Over the past twenty years the percentage of exports of goods and
services has fluctuated. In 1990 it was 21% and in 2000, 20%. It increased
again in 2010 to 26%. On the other hand, its level of imports of goods and
services has continually increased. In 1990 its imports of goods and services
was about 25%. In 2000 it increased by 4% up to 29%, and in 2010 it increased
up to 36%. Migration is another important avenue in Guatemala. According to
Cecilia Menjivar, remittances are "central to the economy." In 2004
remittances to Guatemala from men's migration to the U.S. accounted for
approximately 97% (Menjivar 2)......

The United States is the country's largest trading partner, providing 36% of
Guatemala's imports and receiving 40% of its exports. The government sector is
small and shrinking, with its business activities limited to public
utilities—some of which have been privatized—ports and airports and several
development-oriented financial institutions. Guatemala was certified to
receive export trade benefits under the United States' Caribbean Basin Trade
and Partnership Act (CBTPA) in October 2000, and enjoys access to U.S.
Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) benefits. Due to concerns over serious
worker rights protection issues, however, Guatemala's benefits under both the
CBTPA and GSP are currently under review.[_citation needed_]

The country is predominantly poor, with 49 percent of the population living in
rural areas. Guatemala is characterized by a markedly unequal distribution of
wealth, assets, and opportunities: between 2000 and 2014, rural poverty
increased from 74.5 to 76.1 percent, while extreme rural poverty increased
from 23.8 to 35.3 percent. Young people and indigenous communities are the
most vulnerable. Among indigenous people, who comprise almost 40 percent of
the total population, the poverty rate is approximately 80 percent.

The Inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI) index for Guatemala is 0.481 (Data from
2019), below the average for Latin America (0.596) and distant from the
countries with very high human development (0.800).

## Economic history

Historically, the Guatemala economy was heavily dependent on agriculture. In
1930, coffee was 77% of exports and bananas were 13%.

## Economic development and poverty in Guatemala

From 1990 until 2018, Guatemala was growing with an annual GDP growth
oscillating around 3.5%.

Manufacturing (20%), commerce (18%), private services (14%), and agriculture
(12%) are the biggest estimated economic sectors in Guatemala. The country's
economic structure shows a declining trend in the agricultural sector.

Guatemala is the third biggest country in Central America. It has one of the
highest disparities between rich and poor as well as one of the highest
poverty levels worldwide, with 54% of the population living below the poverty
line in 2006 and 54% in 2011. According to the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), which looks at
multiple deprivations in the same household in regard to education, health and
standard of living, found that in 2011, 25.9% of the population experienced
multiple deprivations and another 9.8% were vulnerable to such deprivations. A
human development report also states that the average percentage of
multidimensional poverty in 2011 was 49.1%.

## Poor women and unpaid work

In Guatemala in 2010, 31% of the female population was illiterate. In rural
Guatemala, 70.5% are poor; women are more likely to be poor in the more rural
areas. Gammage argues that women in poor households engage more in domestic
tasks and undertake more household maintenance, social reproduction and care
work than men. Similarly, Benería states that the women perform tough work but
do not get paid and argues that there is an opportunity cost related, since
the women could be paid for other work instead. Unpaid household work is
associated with the number of people in the household, the location, and the
availability of paid employment. This means that women in rural Guatemala are
greater victims of poverty than urban women, and most poverty is found in the
rural parts of Guatemala, so Gammage found that many rural women perform
unpaid work.

## Educated women and the labor force

The labor force participation rate for women in Guatemala was at 41% in 2018.
Women have a small pay disadvantage, earning 97% of male wages in most
occupations. Gender inequality declines if women have a second and/or third
educational degree, and they are treated more equally with their male
counterparts. As in many countries, both men and women earn the most if they
have a university degree. The percent of women with a steady income increases
for women who have completed the secondary level of schooling, but decreases
again after university. This means that women earn about the same as men if
they both have a secondary education, but after university, men earn more. The
situation changes on the professional level, where women earn more than men.
Men work more hours in all professions, except in the household, because many
women have part-time jobs.

## Child labor

Children in Guatemala are engaged in child labor, primarily in agriculture,
according to the U.S. Department of Labor. In fact, 13.4% of children aged 7
to 14 work; 68% of them are in the agricultural sector, 13% in the industrial
sector, and 18% in the services sector. The 2013 DOL report stated that
"Guatemala [...] lacks Government programs targeting sectors in which children
are known to engage in exploitative labor, such as domestic service, mining,
quarrying, and construction." In December 2014, the Department's _List of
Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor_ included mostly agricultural
goods produced in such working conditions, namely broccoli, coffee, corn and
sugarcane. Guatemala's firework and gravel production also resorted to child
labor according to the report.

## Maquilas

Among the most important factors in Guatemala's economy are the significant
number of Korean-owned maquila factories in the highlands of Guatemala. Korean
entrepreneurs have adopted a buyer-driven commodity chain process that depends
on the existence of a large labor force, low capital investment and low
skills. Korea presents itself to Guatemalan industry and to Guatemalan workers
by means of subcontractors responsible for delivering finished orders to
multiple buyers, mostly located in the United States. Buyers include Macy's
and JCPenney and brands such as Liz Claiborne, OshKosh and Tracy Evans.

The first industries began in 1980s. At first, workers were very interested in
the new jobs in the factories, because they offered the opportunity to
transition to what was seen as a new and modern world, away from agricultural
work. However, in the factories, workers' backs hurt, because they sat for
many hours on backless benches in front of sewing machines. Workers would
usually enter the plant at 7:00 a.m. and take a 1-hour break for lunch at
noon. They were expected to work until 7:00 or 8:00pm. About 70% of the
workers in macula factories were female. Years later, there was a huge
turnover. Workers started to leave the maquila factories for reasons including
stress, bad treatment, poor payment, etc.

The legal framework as of 2024 is the _Law for the Promotion and Development
of Export Activities and Maquilas_ aimed mainly at the apparel and textile
sector and at services exporters such as call centers and business processes
outsourcing (BPO) companies. The government grants investors in these two
sectors a 10-year income tax exemption. Additionally there is an exemption
from duties and value-added taxes (VAT) on imported machinery and equipment
and a one-year suspension of the same duties and taxes on imports of
production inputs, samples, and packing material.

## Economic priorities

Current economic priorities include:[_citation needed_]

  * Liberalizing the trade regime;
  * Financial services sector reform;
  * Overhauling Guatemala's public finances;
  * Simplifying the tax structure, enhancing tax compliance, and broadening the tax base.
  * Improving the investment climate through procedural and regulatory simplification and adopting a goal of concluding treaties to protect investment and intellectual property rights.

Import tariffs have been lowered in conjunction with Guatemala's Central
American neighbors so that most fall between 0% and 15%, with further
reductions planned. Responding to Guatemala's changed political and economic
policy environment, the international community has mobilized substantial
resources to support the country's economic and social development objectives.
The United States, along with other donor countries—especially France, Italy,
Spain, Germany, Japan, and the international financial institutions—have
increased development project financing. Donors' response to the need for
international financial support funds for implementation of the Peace Accords
is, however, contingent upon Guatemalan government reforms and counterpart
financing.

Problems hindering economic growth include high crime rates, illiteracy and
low levels of education, and an inadequate and underdeveloped capital market.
They also include lack of infrastructure, particularly in the transportation,
telecommunications, and electricity sectors, although the state telephone
company and electricity distribution were privatized in 1998. The distribution
of income and wealth remains highly skewed. The wealthiest 10% of the
population receives almost one-half of all income, and the top 20% receives
two-thirds of all income. Approximately 29% of the population lives in
poverty, and 6% of that number live in extreme poverty. Guatemala's social
indicators, such as infant mortality and illiteracy, are successively
improving, but remain in low growth and are still among the worst in the
hemisphere. In 2000 the percentage of girls completing primary school was
approximately 52%. That percentage rose in 2010 to about 81%. The completion
rate in primary school for boys in 2000 was 63% and rose to 87% in 2010.

In 2005 Guatemala ratified its signature to the Dominican Republic-Central
America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA) between the United States and several
other Central American countries.

The electricity sector is being privatized, resulting in very high prices. In
rural areas, although electricity consumption per household is very low, the
ratings can represent more than 20% of farmers' salaries according to the
Comité de développement paysan (Codeca). Since privatization, the price per
kilowatthour has risen to the point of becoming one of the most expensive in
Latin America. To protest against this situation and demand the
renationalization of electrical services, Codeca members organized
demonstrations and exposed themselves to repression. Between 2012 and 2014, 97
people were imprisoned, 220 wounded and 17 killed.

### 2009 food crisis

In September 2009, Guatemalan President Álvaro Colom stated that the situation
reduced the domestic food supply and reduced Guatemala's ability to import
food. Colom said the government would immediately seek assistance for
emergency food supplies.

A number of international organizations expressed concern about Guatemala's
economic status in 2009. They were the United Nations World Food Programme
(WFP) and the World Bank.

## Agriculture

Guatemala is the world leader in cardamom production and export. As of 2013,
demand for biofuels has resulted in diversion of land from subsistence
agriculture to sugar cane and African Palm plantations. Much of the land is
owned by large landlords. Due to legal requirements for production of biofuels
in the United States the price of maize, a Guatemalan staple, has risen
sharply. Agriculture accounts for 60% of Guatemalan exports and employs more
than 50% of the labor force.

In 2018, Guatemala produced 35.5 million tons of sugarcane (it's one of the 10
largest producers in the world) and 4 million tons of banana (it's one of the
15 largest world producers). In addition, in the same year it produced 2.3
million tons of palm oil, 245 thousand tons of coffee, 1.9 million tons of
maize, 623 thousand tons of melon, 312 thousand tons of pineapple, 564
thousand tons of potato, 349 thousand tons of rubber, 331 thousand tons of
tomato, 253 thousand tons of beans, 124 thousand tons of avocado, 124 thousand
tons of lemon, 177 thousand tons of orange, 120 thousand tons of cauliflower
and broccoli, 93 thousand tons of papaya, 107 thousand tons of watermelon, 98
thousand tons of carrot, 75 thousand tons of cabbage, 84 thousand tons of
lettuce and chicory, 38 thousand tons of cardamom in addition to smaller
productions of other agricultural products.

### Scale

The agricultural sector of Guatemala's economy consists of two types of
producers: numerous small-scale peasant-owned farms in the highlands, and
fewer medium- to large-scale operations in the more fertile lowlands. The
smaller farms produce staples for Guatemalan consumption, such as beans and
maize, as well as fruits and vegetables for export. Larger farms produce
export and plantation products like bananas, sugar cane, coffee, and rubber
and palm oil. While 88% of agricultural land in Guatemala is in large-scale
farms, 92% of all farms in Guatemala are small. Large farms produce 1/3 more
per hectare than small farms, but employ fewer people overall.

### Non-traditional agricultural exports

The shift to the production of non-traditional agricultural exports (NTAE) is
a strategy used by developing countries like Guatemala to grow the
agricultural sector and decreasing inequality by including the rural poor in
the benefits of globalization. The most important NTAE crops in Guatemala
include

  * fruit like mangos, melons, and berries
  * vegetables like cauliflower, cabbage, broccoli, and snow peas
  * organic crops such as coffee. The value of non-traditional agricultural export crops has increased from $146 million US in 1992 to $262 million in 2001. IN 1998, NTAE accounted for 8.7 percent of the total exports. NTAE production largely comes from small-scale farmers. While the farmers who are involved in this market are not failing, this market limits their capital accumulation to slow growth, and therefore they are not able to profit highly off of this market.

### Gender

The agricultural sector of Guatemala is differentiated by gender, and this
differential can be seen in several different areas within the sector. More
men than women inherit or buy land individually, although many houses choose
to rent land instead of buying it. Additionally, there is a gender gap in the
division of agricultural labor. Traditionally, men dominated subsistence
production and agricultural production for domestic markets, while women had
roles in small animal production, craft production, and the selling of
products in regional rather than national markets. With the shift toward NTAE,
there has also been an increase in field labor for women. Additionally, women
have been included in land-use decision processes in NTAE production. Sarah
Hamilton, Linda Asturias de Barrios, and Brenda Tevalán have stated that
despite a traditional patriarchal structure in Guatemala, NTAE production is
associated with increased independence and equality between men and women.

### Climate change

Guatemalan farmers have experienced extreme weather events such as hurricanes,
as well as erratic weather patterns with spikes and drops in temperature,
torrential rains, drought, and unexpected frost. One crop affected has been
potatoes, which suffer from fungus.

Guatemala's western highlands are particularly susceptible to climate change,
impacting the region’s predominantly indigenous population of subsistence
farmers. The main crops, potatoes and maize, have been over increasing
pressure as hard frosts in the region have become more frequent since 2013.
Hard frosts can kill a whole season’s worth of crops at once. At lower
elevations, new pests are becoming more prevalent and there has been decreased
rainfall.

The problem of food security and famine has increased, especially in the
“corredor seco" (an area extending from the departments of Izabal and Baja
Verapaz in the north to Santa Rosa and Jutiapa in the south).

## Macroeconomic development

Guatemala became more economically developed and stable from 1990 to 2011. The
annual GDP growth rate for Guatemala in 2000 was 3.6%, but just 0.9% in 2009,
increasing slightly in 2010 to 2.0% The poverty rate in Guatemala in 2006 was
54.8%, and the extreme poverty rate was 26.1%. Latin America as a whole had a
poverty rate of 33% and an extreme poverty rate of 12.9% in 2009. The data
indicate that Guatemala is behind other Latin American countries, in terms of
lowering poverty rates, but there has been an increase in economic activity in
terms of GDP and development. Guatemala's HDI increased from 0.462 in 1990, to
0.525 in 2000, to 0.550 in 2005, and 0.574 in 2011.3 Guatemala ranked 131st in
HDI in 2011. Other important human development statistics such as the total
fertility rate in Guatemala decreased from 4.8 births per woman in 2000 to 4.2
births per woman in 2006. During the same period, life expectancy increased
from 67.9 years in 2000, to 69.9 years in 2006.

The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2021 (with IMF
staff estimates in 2022–2027). Inflation below 5% is in green. The annual
unemployment rate is extracted from the World Bank, although the International
Monetary Fund find them unreliable.

Year  | GDP (in Bil. US$PPP) | GDP per capita (in US$ PPP) | GDP (in Bil. US$nominal) | GDP per capita (in US$ nominal) | GDP growth (real) | Inflation rate (in Percent) | Unemployment (in Percent) | Government debt (in % of GDP)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1980  | 19.2  | 2,660.2  | 7.7  | 1,070.3  | 3.7%  | 10.7%  | n/a  | n/a   
1981  | 21.1  | 2,857.9  | 8.4  | 1,140.2  | 0.6%  | 11.4%  | n/a  | n/a   
1982  | 21.6  | 2,854.5  | 8.5  | 1,126.2  | -3.5%  | 4.9%  | n/a  | n/a   
1983  | 21.9  | 2,819.3  | 8.9  | 1,140.0  | -2.5%  | 6.7%  | n/a  | n/a   
1984  | 22.8  | 2,862.6  | 9.3  | 1,163.1  | 0.5%  | 3.2%  | n/a  | n/a   
1985  | 23.4  | 2,861.9  | 11.0  | 1,338.7  | -0.6%  | 19.2%  | n/a  | n/a   
1986  | 23.9  | 2,849.4  | 5.9  | 705.8  | 0.1%  | 32.8%  | n/a  | n/a   
1987  | 25.4  | 2,949.2  | 6.9  | 797.0  | 3.6%  | 10.8%  | n/a  | n/a   
1988  | 27.3  | 3,093.7  | 7.4  | 841.8  | 3.9%  | 10.3%  | n/a  | n/a   
1989  | 29.5  | 3,260.3  | 8.6  | 946.8  | 3.9%  | 13.0%  | n/a  | n/a   
1990  | 31.5  | 3,403.7  | 7.5  | 808.9  | 3.1%  | 38.0%  | n/a  | n/a   
1991  | 33.6  | 3,540.5  | 9.2  | 966.0  | 3.0%  | 35.1%  | 2.6%  | n/a   
1992  | 35.9  | 3,699.9  | 10.2  | 1,045.4  | 4.6%  | 10.2%  | 2.6%  | n/a   
1993  | 38.0  | 3,825.6  | 11.0  | 1,110.0  | 3.4%  | 13.4%  | 2.6%  | n/a   
1994  | 40.2  | 3,951.2  | 12.5  | 1,229.0  | 3.5%  | 12.5%  | 2.6%  | n/a   
1995  | 42.8  | 4,116.0  | 14.0  | 1,348.9  | 4.4%  | 8.4%  | 2.6%  | n/a   
1996  | 44.8  | 4,212.4  | 15.0  | 1,408.2  | 2.8%  | 11.1%  | 2.7%  | n/a   
1997  | 47.5  | 4,362.0  | 17.0  | 1,559.6  | 4.1%  | 9.2%  | 2.7%  | n/a   
1998  | 50.2  | 4,512.1  | 18.4  | 1,656.4  | 4.6%  | 6.6%  | 2.7%  | n/a   
1999  | 52.8  | 4,639.2  | 17.4  | 1,527.2  | 3.7%  | 5.2%  | 2.7%  | n/a   
2000  | 55.4  | 4,752.9  | 18.1  | 1,555.6  | 2.5%  | 6.0%  | 2.7%  | 18.0%   
2001  | 58.0  | 4,862.2  | 19.7  | 1,655.0  | 2.4%  | 7.3%  | 2.8%  | 19.1%   
2002  | 61.4  | 5,027.9  | 21.9  | 1,795.8  | 4.2%  | 8.1%  | 2.8%  | 17.4%   
2003  | 64.2  | 5,138.5  | 23.1  | 1,847.3  | 2.6%  | 5.6%  | 2.8%  | 19.8%   
2004  | 67.9  | 5,307.3  | 25.0  | 1,951.8  | 3.0%  | 7.6%  | 3.0%  | 20.6%   
2005  | 72.2  | 5,512.6  | 28.2  | 2,151.7  | 3.1%  | 9.1%  | 3.1%  | 20.0%   
2006  | 78.6  | 5,864.7  | 31.3  | 2,337.0  | 5.6%  | 6.6%  | 3.1%  | 20.9%   
2007  | 85.6  | 6,246.2  | 35.0  | 2,556.8  | 6.0%  | 6.8%  | 3.1%  | 20.8%   
2008  | 90.4  | 6,454.9  | 40.2  | 2,873.1  | 3.7%  | 11.4%  | 3.3%  | 19.6%   
2009  | 91.6  | 6,395.8  | 38.0  | 2,654.1  | 0.6%  | 1.9%  | 3.5%  | 22.8%   
2010  | 95.3  | 6,511.4  | 41.5  | 2,836.1  | 2.8%  | 3.9%  | 3.5%  | 24.0%   
2011  | 101.6  | 6,794.3  | 47.4  | 3,172.1  | 4.4%  | 6.2%  | 3.1%  | 23.8%   
2012  | 107.2  | 7,017.7  | 49.9  | 3,267.8  | 3.1%  | 3.8%  | 2.8%  | 24.6%   
2013  | 112.0  | 7,183.1  | 53.0  | 3,397.6  | 3.5%  | 4.3%  | 3.0%  | 25.0%   
2014  | 118.8  | 7,457.9  | 57.8  | 3,632.1  | 4.4%  | 3.4%  | 2.7%  | 24.7%   
2015  | 127.6  | 7,849.1  | 62.2  | 3,825.9  | 4.1%  | 2.4%  | 2.5%  | 24.8%   
2016  | 130.1  | 7,847.2  | 66.0  | 3,982.0  | 2.7%  | 4.4%  | 2.6%  | 25.0%   
2017  | 133.9  | 7,912.5  | 71.6  | 4,233.0  | 3.1%  | 4.4%  | 2.5%  | 25.1%   
2018  | 141.8  | 8,210.5  | 73.3  | 4,247.5  | 3.4%  | 3.8%  | 2.3%  | 26.4%   
2019  | 150.1  | 8,518.5  | 77.2  | 4,379.8  | 4.0%  | 3.7%  | 2.2%  | 26.4%   
2020  | 149.2  | 8,300.2  | 77.6  | 4,318.6  | -1.8%  | 3.2%  | 3.6%  | 31.5%   
2021  | 167.8  | 9,148.9  | 86.0  | 4,687.8  | 8.0%  | 4.3%  | 3.6%  | 30.8%   
2022  | 185.8  | 9,931.4  | 91.3  | 4,879.9  | 3.4%  | 6.4%  | n/a  | 30.1%   
2023  | 198.6  | 10,402.8  | 95.6  | 5,006.7  | 3.2%  | 5.6%  | n/a  | 30.0%   
2024  | 210.6  | 10,809.0  | 102.9  | 5,280.9  | 3.8%  | 4.3%  | n/a  | 29.7%   
2025  | 222.3  | 11,183.1  | 110.2  | 5,545.5  | 3.6%  | 4.0%  | n/a  | 29.6%   
2026  | 234.6  | 11,564.2  | 117.9  | 5,815.0  | 3.5%  | 4.0%  | n/a  | 29.4%   
2027  | 247.5  | 11,957.2  | 126.1  | 6,094.9  | 3.5%  | 4.0%  | n/a  | 29.3%   
  
### Electrical infrastructure in rural Guatemala

Guatemala electricity production by year

In Guatemala lack of access to electricity is concentrated in rural areas,
although informal settlements around urban peripheries also tend to lack
metered service. Guatemala's post-civil war efforts to improve electrical
access in the countryside have proceeded under the auspices of the Rural
Electrification Plan (Spanish: PER), a public-private partnership between the
government's Ministry of Education and Mines (Mineduc) and private power
companies. Over the period 2000 to 2011, the PER improved rates of electrical
grid connectivity among non-indigenous (62 to 82 percent) and indigenous (48
to 70 percent) households in Guatemala. Continuity of the electrical grid is
robust, with both groups reporting only about one hour per day of
unavailability. Even when rural users are connected to the grid and pay
subsidized rates, they often have difficulty affording electrical appliances,
which translates into low power consumption (less than five percent of average
US residential usage). This low power usage by rural customers is often not
profitable for power companies, disincentivizing further expansion of the
grid. As of 2014, one third of Guatemala's poorest rural residents still
lacked electricity. By contrast, only around 8% of high-income rural residents
lacked service, demonstrating that affordability plays a role in the
accessibility of electrical grids.

In 2016, domestic hydroelectric power supplied the majority (about 34 percent)
of Guatemala's electricity. The planning process for constructing new
hydropower dams was updated by the Guatemalan Congress in 1996 and 2007
(Decree 93–96, the "General Law of Electricity"), giving project developers
more power over the process, especially with regards to environmental impact
assessments (EIA). A study in Guatemala covering the period 2009 to 2014 found
that private construction firms generally have little knowledge of the rights
of rural indigenous peoples their projects may be affecting. Firms typically
hire consultants to perform EIAs and liaise with affected communities.
However, consultants are frequently disinterested in adequately informing
rural communities of the potential impacts of proposed projects. Instead,
consultants frequently resort to bribery and manipulation to obtain consent to
proceed with hydroelectric projects. Interlocutors from within the government
say that there is internal pressure to approve EIAs even if they are performed
inadequately, showing that visions of Guatemala's energy future may be
overriding the interests of segments of its populace.