The **economy of Mauritius** is a mixed developing economy based on
agriculture, exports, financial services, and tourism. Since the 1980s, the
government of Mauritius has sought to diversify the country's economy beyond
its dependence on just agriculture, particularly sugar production.

## Overview

Sugarcane. Working in the salt marshes.

In 1961, Professor James Meade painted a bleak picture of the economic
prospects of Mauritius, which then had a population of 650,000. All the
disadvantages associated with smallness of island states weighed heavily in
his conviction that Mauritius was caught in a Malthusian trap and, therefore,
if economic progress could at all be achieved, it would be to a very limited
extent.[_citation needed_] Since independence in 1968, Mauritius has developed
from a low-income, agriculturally based economy to an upper-middle income
diversified economy with growing industrial, financial, ICT and tourist
sectors. For most of the period, annual growth has been roughly 4%. This
compares very favourably with other sub-Saharan African countries and is
largely due to sustained progress in economic conditions; between 1977 and
2008, growth averaged 4.6% compared with a 2.9% average in sub-Saharan Africa.
Also important is that it has achieved what few fast growing economies
achieve, a more equitable income distribution and inequality (as measured by
the Gini coefficient) fell from 45.7 to 38.9 between 1980 and 2006. This
remarkable achievement has been reflected in increased life expectancy,
lowered infant mortality, and a much-improved infrastructure. Sugarcane is
grown on about 90% of the cultivated land area and accounts for 25% of export
earnings.[_citation needed_] The government's development strategy centres on
expanding local financial institutions and building a domestic information
telecommunications industry. Mauritius has attracted more than 9,000 offshore
entities, many aimed at commerce in India and South Africa, and investment in
the banking sector alone has reached over $1 billion. Mauritius, with its
strong textile sector, has been well poised to take advantage of the Africa
Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA).[_citation needed_]

With a well-developed legal and commercial infrastructure and a tradition of
entrepreneurship and representative government, Mauritius is one of the
developing world's most successful democracies. The economy has shown a
considerable degree of resilience, and an environment already conducive to
dynamic entrepreneurial activity has moved further toward economic freedom.
The island's institutional advantages are noticeable. A transparent and well-
defined investment code and legal system have made the foreign investment
climate in Mauritius one of the best in the region.[_citation needed_]
Taxation is competitive and efficient. The economy is increasingly
diversified, with significant private-sector activity in sugar, tourism,
economic processing zones, and financial services, particularly in offshore
enterprises.[_citation needed_] The government is trying to modernize the
sugar and textile industries, which in the past were overly dependent on trade
preferences, while promoting diversification into such areas as information
and communications technology, financial and business services, seafood
processing and exports, and free trade zones. Agriculture and industry have
become less important to the economy, and services, especially tourism,
accounted for over 72 percent of GDP.[_when?_] The government still owns
utilities and controls imports of rice, flour, petroleum products, and
cement.[_citation needed_]

Europe and the United States are the traditional export markets of Mauritius;
preferential trading deals with partners such as the European Union and the
United States in some economic sectors, such as the sugar industry and in
textile and clothing sectors, resulted in the significant growth of the total
exports of Mauritius, especially from the 1970s to the 1990s. Clothing and
textile industry in Mauritius started in the 1970s, when foreign investors
(mainly coming from Hong Kong) started setting up firms which would assemble
imported textiles into clothing; most of those activities happed in the export
processing zones (EPZs). The clothing and textile sector spearheaded the
industrialization process in Mauritius; in 2019 it represented around 43% of
exports.

## History

The Mauritian economy has undergone remarkable transformations since
independence. From a poor country with high unemployment exporting mainly
sugar and buffeted by the vagaries of world demand, Mauritius has become
relatively prosperous and diverse, although not without problems.

The 1970s were marked by a strong government commitment to diversify the
economy and to provide more high-paying jobs to the population. The promotion
of tourism and the creation of the EPZs did much to attain these goals.
Between 1971 and 1977, about 64,000 jobs were created. However, in the rush to
make work, the government allowed EPZ firms to deny their workers fair wages,
the right to organize and strike, and the health and social benefits afforded
other Mauritian workers. The boom in the mid-1970s was also fuelled by
increased foreign aid and exceptional sugar crops, coupled with high world
prices.

The economic situation deteriorated in the late 1970s. Petroleum prices rose,
the sugar boom ended, and the balance of payments deficit steadily rose as
imports outpaced exports; by 1979 the deficit amounted to a staggering US$111
million. Mauritius approached the IMF and the World Bank for assistance. In
exchange for loans and credits to help pay for imports, the government agreed
to institute certain measures, including cutting food subsidies, devaluing the
currency, and limiting government wage increases.

By the 1980s, thanks to a widespread political consensus on broad policy
measures, the economy experienced steady growth, declining inflation, high
employment, and increased domestic savings. The EPZ with investment
principally from China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, and came into its own,
surpassing sugar as the principal export-earning sector and employing more
workers than the sugar industry and the government combined, previously the
two largest employers. In 1986 Mauritius had its first trade surplus in twelve
years. Tourism also boomed, with a concomitant expansion in the number of
hotel beds and air flights. An aura of optimism accompanied the country's
economic success and prompted comparisons with other Asian countries that had
dynamic economies, including Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, and South Korea.

The economy had slowed down by the late 1980s and early 1990s, but the
government was optimistic that it could ensure the long-term prosperity of the
country by drawing up and implementing prudent development plans. A stock
exchange opened in Port Louis in 1989. As of 1993, Mauritius had a gross
domestic product (GDP) estimated at US$8.6 billion, with a growth rate of 5.5
percent, and an inflation rate of 10.5 percent.

Mauritius has always depended on external financial flows, such as tourism
revenues, offshore financing and foreign aid.

## Policies for success

Recent reports on progress on the Millennium Development Goals by the Overseas
Development Institute indicated four key reasons for economic success.

  1. Heterodox liberalisation and diversification
  2. Concerted strategy of nation building
  3. Strong and inclusive institutions
  4. High levels of equitable public investment

### Heterodox liberalisation and diversification

Mauritius has followed a pragmatic development strategy in which
liberalisation process was sequenced and tailored to its competitive
advantages and weaknesses. The export-orientated approach has encouraged
liberalisation supported by strong state involvement as a facilitator (of the
enabling environment for the private sector); as operator (to encourage
competition); and as regulator (to protect the economy as well as vulnerable
groups and sectors from shocks). Strategies were evidence-based and adapted
according to results. There has been consistency and stability, regardless of
which political party is in power.

Liberalisation occurred in phases that were initiated to build on advantages
the economy enjoyed on the international market.

  * 1970s: Mauritius profited from sugar rents, established an export processing zone EPZ and successfully attracted capital and foreign investment in manufacturing, from China, Hong Kong and Taiwan.
  * 1980s–1990s: EPZ expanded and led to a significant increase in foreign direct investment (FDI) and tourism. Preferential access to sugar and clothing markets amounted to 7% of GDP in the 1980s and 4.5% in the 1990s, capital and current accounts were liberalised, contributing to an investment and employment boom and the high inflow of FDI brought with it managerial skills.
  * 1990s–2010: Further diversification, liberalisation and investment as Chinese investors left to pursue investments in Africa and China.

### Concerted strategy of nation building

A concerted strategy of nation building since Independence created the
foundations for sustained growth. Partnerships across ethnic groups allowed
economic redistribution to be negotiated and the resulting better balance of
economic and political power allowed strong and independent institutions. The
emerging political system encouraged a consultative approach to policy
formation that allowed strategies for growth to be continued regardless of
changes in the parties in power.

### Strong and inclusive institutions

Strong institutions are critical in ensuring country's competitiveness,
economic resilience and stability. They have supported development strategies
and ensured that export earnings are reinvested in strategic and productive
sectors. In the financial sector, they have built a regulated and well-
capitalised banking and financial system that protected it from toxic assets
prior to the 2008 financial crisis.

#### Corruption laws

In 2002, the government adopted the Prevention of Corruption Act, which led to
the setting up of an Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) a few
months later. The ICAC has the power to detect and investigate corruption and
money-laundering offences and can also confiscate the proceeds of corruption
and money laundering. Corruption is not seen as an obstacle to foreign direct
investment. Mauritius ranks 55th out of 168 countries in Transparency
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index for 2023.

### High levels of equitable public investment

Mauritius has a strong human capital foundation developed through consistent
and equitable investment in human development. This enabled Mauritius to
exploit advantages, learn from expertise brought in through FDI and maintain
competitiveness in a fast evolving international market. Education and health
services are free and have been expanded in recent years, in order to create
further employment opportunities and ensuring inclusive growth. The educated
and adaptable workforce were essential elements of 1980s export-orientated
growth. Around 90% of entrepreneurs in the export processing zone (EPZ) and in
the manufacturing sector were eventually Mauritian nationals, businesspeople
had the human capital, education and knowledge needed to exploit market
opportunities. According to the Government of Mauritius the general outlook
for the manufacturing sector is positive, as the country offers many
opportunities to entrepreneurs across the various value chains but
insufficient skilled labour and limited research and development will remain
impediments to potentially higher growth in this sector.

## Financial services

Mauritius provides an environment for banks, insurance and reinsurance
companies, captive insurance managers, trading companies, ship owners or
managers, fund managers and professionals to conduct their international
business. The economic success achieved in the 1980s engendered the rapid
growth of the financial services sector in Mauritius. The following types of
offshore activities can be conducted in Mauritius:

  * Offshore Banking
  * Offshore Insurance
  * Offshore Funds Management
  * International Financial Services
  * Operational Headquarters
  * International Consultancy Services
  * Shipping and Ship Management
  * Aircraft Financing and Leasing
  * International Licensing and Franchising
  * International Data Processing and Information Technology Services
  * Offshore Pension Funds
  * International Trading
  * International Assets Management

## Information and communication technology

Since 2002, Mauritius has invested heavily into the development of a hub in
information and communication technology (ICT). The contribution of the ICT
sector accounts for 5.7% of the GDP. The ICT Sector employs 15,390 people.
Mauritius has also contributed to the development of post quantum cryptography
by contributing to GnuTLS with an implementation of MLKEM-1024 and
SecP384R1MLKEM1024.

## Agriculture

### Sugar industry

## Macroeconomic statistics

Name  | Source  | Year  | Notes  | Ref   
---|---|---|---|---  
GDP (PPP)  
International Monetary Fund | 2012  | GDP (PPP) is $20.200 billion  | [1]  
World Bank | 2012  | GDP (PPP) is $19,245,631,329  | [2]  
[3]  
The World Factbook | 2012  | GDP (PPP) is $20,950,000,000  | [4]  
GDP (PPP) per capita  
International Monetary Fund | 2012  | GDP (PPP) per capita is $15,591.974  | [5]  
World Bank | 2012  | GDP (PPP) per capita is $14,902  | [6]  
The World Factbook | 2013  | GDP (PPP) per capita is $16,100  | [7]  
GDP (PPP) per person employed  
World Bank | 1990-2010  |  | [8]  
The World Factbook | 2012  |  | [9] Archived 2013-05-10 at the Wayback Machine  
GDP (nominal)  
United Nations | 2012  | GDP (nominal) is $10,086,649,093  | [10]  
International Monetary Fund | 2013  | GDP (nominal) is US$11.930 billion  | [11]  
World Bank | 2012  | GDP (nominal) is $10,486,037,634  | [12]  
[13]  
The World Factbook | 2013  | GDP (nominal) is $11.9 billion  | [14] Archived 2018-12-24 at the Wayback Machine  
GDP (nominal) per capita  
United Nations | 2012  |  | [15]  
International Monetary Fund | 2013  | GDP (nominal) per capita is US$9,159.681  | [16]  
World Bank | 2012  |  | [17]  
The World Factbook | 2013  |  | [18] Archived 2018-12-24 at the Wayback Machine  
Gross national income (Atlas method) | World Bank | 2012  | Gross national income is US$11,070 million  | [19]  
GNI per capita (Atlas method and PPP) | World Bank | 2012  | Average national income (PPP) of US$8,570 per person/Year  | [20]  
  
**Household income or consumption by percentage share** :

**Distribution of family income – Gini index** : 39 (2006 estimate)

**Agriculture – products** : sugarcane, tea, corn, potatoes, bananas, pulses;
cattle, goats; fish

**Industrial production growth rate** : 8% (2000 estimate)

**Electricity – production** : 1,836 GWh (2002)

**Electricity – consumption** : 1,707 GWh (2002)

**Oil – consumption** : 21,000 bbl/d (3,300 m3/d) (2003 estimate)  
21,000 bbl/d (3,300 m3/d) (2001 estimate)

**Current account balance** : $1,339 million (2011 estimate)  
$799.4 million (2010 estimate)

**Reserves of foreign exchange and gold** : $2,797 billion (2012 estimate)  
$2,601 billion (2010 estimate)

**2013 Index of Economic Freedom rank** : 8th[_citation needed_]

**Exchange rates** : Mauritian rupees per US dollar – 30.12 (26 March 2014),
30.99 (1 February 2010), 32.86 (2006), 29.14 (2005), 27.50 (2004), 27.90
(2003), 29.96 (2002), 29.13 (2001)

## Climate change and the economy

Mauritius faces significant environmental challenges such as flash floods and
coastal erosion, which have substantial economic implications. In June 2024,
the government announced plans to introduce a 2% climate levy on company
profits to finance projects that combat climate change and restore the natural
ecosystem. Companies with sales of less than 50 million rupees ($1.06 million)
will be exempt from this levy. The proceeds from this corporate responsibility
levy will be used to support national initiatives to protect, manage, invest
in, and restore the country's natural ecosystem and combat the effects of
climate change. The nation of 1.26 million people is experiencing more climate
change-related events and needs to mobilize 300 billion rupees to meet its
adaptation and mitigation goals.

In 2024, flash floods brought the capital, Port Louis, to a halt, causing
significant disruptions in banking and market activities. Tourism, a crucial
source of foreign currency for Mauritius, is expected to generate over $2
billion in earnings from visitors this year. However, more than 37 kilometres
(23 mi) of the coastline have been affected by erosion, posing a threat to
this vital industry. In response, the government has allocated 3.2 billion
rupees to the new climate fund, which will be used to rehabilitate
approximately 26 kilometres (16 mi) of shoreline and 30 degraded sites. For
the fiscal year ending in June 2025, Mauritius' government expenditure is
projected to rise by 17% to 237.3 billion rupees, with revenue expected to
grow by 20% to 210.5 billion rupees. This will narrow the fiscal gap to 3.4%
of GDP from 3.9% in 2024. Borrowing requirements will increase to 38 billion
rupees from 30.7 billion rupees, including 14 billion rupees in foreign
financing. Despite higher borrowing, public debt as a percentage of GDP is
projected to decrease to 71.5% from 74.5% in 2024, though in absolute terms,
it will rise to 567.49 billion rupees from 524.6 billion rupees. Additionally,
a government-support agreement is expected to unlock over 15 billion rupees in
private-sector investment in renewable energy projects, demonstrating the
government's commitment to sustainable development and economic resilience.